The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Meditations of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, by Marcus Aurelius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Meditations of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
       A new rendering based on the Foulis translation of 1742

Author: Marcus Aurelius

Translator: George Chrystal

Release Date: August 9, 2017 [EBook #55317]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDITATIONS OF MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS ***




Produced by E.H.N.




                        THE MEDITATIONS OF THE
                            EMPEROR MARCUS
                          AURELIUS ANTONINUS

                     A NEW RENDERING BASED ON THE
                      FOULIS TRANSLATION OF 1742

                        BY GEORGE W. CHRYSTAL
            WARNER EXHIBITIONER OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, OXFORD

                              EDINBURGH
                        OTTO SCHULZE & COMPANY
                       20 SOUTH FREDERIC STREET
                    LONDON: S. C. BROWN & COMPANY
                    47 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, W.C.

                                 1902

                           MARCUS AURELIUS
                              ANTONINUS

                               BOOK I.

1. I learned from my grandfather, Verus, to use good manners, and to
put restraint on anger. 2. In the famous memory of my father I had a
pattern of modesty and manliness. 3. Of my mother I learned to be
pious and generous; to keep myself not only from evil deeds, but even
from evil thoughts; and to live with a simplicity which is far from
customary among the rich. 4. I owe it to my great-grandfather that I
did not attend public lectures and discussions, but had good and able
teachers at home; and I owe him also the knowledge that for things of
this nature a man should count no expense too great.

5. My tutor taught me not to favour either green or blue at the
chariot races, nor, in the contests of gladiators, to be a supporter
either of light or heavy armed. He taught me also to endure labour;
not to need many things; to serve myself without troubling others; not
to intermeddle in the affairs of others, and not easily to listen to
slanders against them.

6. Of Diognetus I had the lesson not to busy myself about vain things;
not to credit the great professions of such as pretend to work
wonders, or of sorcerers about their charms, and their expelling of
Demons and the like; not to keep quails (for fighting or divination),
nor to run after such things; to suffer freedom of speech in others,
and to apply myself heartily to philosophy. Him also I must thank for
my hearing first Bacchius, then Tandasis and Marcianus; that I wrote
dialogues in my youth, and took a liking to the philosopher's pallet
and skins, and to the other things which, by the Grecian discipline,
belong to that profession.

7. To Rusticus I owe my first apprehensions that my nature needed
reform and cure; and that I did not fall into the ambition of the
common Sophists, either by composing speculative writings or by
declaiming harangues of exhortation in public; further, that I never
strove to be admired by ostentation of great patience in an ascetic
life, or by display of activity and application; that I gave over the
study of rhetoric, poetry, and the graces of language; and that I did
not pace my house in my senatorial robes, or practise any similar
affectation. I observed also the simplicity of style in his letters,
particularly in that which he wrote to my mother from Sinuessa. I
learned from him to be easily appeased, and to be readily reconciled
with those who had displeased me or given cause of offence, so soon as
they inclined to make their peace; to read with care; not to rest
satisfied with a slight and superficial knowledge; nor quickly to
assent to great talkers. I have him to thank that I met with the
discourses of Epictetus, which he furnished me from his own library.

8. From Apollonius I learned true liberty, and tenacity of purpose; to
regard nothing else, even in the smallest degree, but reason always;
and always to remain unaltered in the agonies of pain, in the losses
of children, or in long diseases. He afforded me a living example of
how the same man can, upon occasion, be most yielding and most
inflexible. He was patient in exposition; and, as might well be seen,
esteemed his fine skill and ability in teaching others the principles
of philosophy as the least of his endowments. It was from him that I
learned how to receive from friends what are thought favours without
seeming humbled by the giver or insensible to the gift.

9. Sextus was my pattern of a benign temper, and his family the model
of a household governed by true paternal affection, and a steadfast
purpose of living according to nature. Here I could learn to be grave
without affectation, to observe sagaciously the several dispositions
and inclinations of my friends, to tolerate the ignorant and those who
follow current opinions without examination. His conversation showed
how a man may accommodate himself to all men and to all companies; for
though companionship with him was sweeter and more pleasing than any
sort of flattery, yet he was at the same time highly respected and
reverenced. No man was ever more happy than he in comprehending,
finding out, and arranging in exact order the great maxims necessary
for the conduct of life. His example taught me to suppress even the
least appearance of anger or any other passion; but still, with all
this perfect tranquillity, to possess the tenderest and most
affectionate heart; to be apt to approve others yet without noise; to
have much learning and little ostentation.

10. I learned from Alexander the Grammarian to avoid censuring others,
to refrain from flouting them for a barbarism, solecism, or any false
pronunciation. Rather was I dexterously to pronounce the words rightly
in my answer, confining approval or objection to the matter itself,
and avoiding discussion of the expression, or to use some other form
of courteous suggestion.

11. Fronto made me sensible how much of envy, deceit and hypocrisy
surrounds princes; and that generally those whom we account nobly born
have somehow less natural affection.

12. I learned from Alexander the Platonist not often nor without great
necessity to say, or write to any man in a letter, that I am not at
leisure; nor thus, under pretext of urgent affairs, to make a practice
of excusing myself from the duties which, according to our various
ties, we owe to those with whom we live.

13. Of Catulus I learned not to condemn any friend's expostulation
even though it were unjust, but to try to recall him to his former
disposition; to stint no praise in speaking of my masters, as is
recounted of Domitius and Athenodorus; and to love my children with
true affection.

14. Of Severus, my brother, I learned to love my kinsmen, to love
truth, to love justice. Through him I came to know Thrasea, Helvidius,
Cato, Dion, and Brutus. He gave me my first conception of a
Commonwealth founded upon equitable laws and administered with
equality of right; and of a Monarchy whose chief concern is the
freedom of its subjects. Of him I learned likewise a constant and
harmonious devotion to Philosophy; to be ready to do good, to be
generous with all my heart. He taught me to be of good hope and
trustful of the affection of my friends. I observed in him candour in
declaring what he condemned in the conduct of others; and so frank and
open was his behaviour, that his friends might easily see without the
trouble of conjecture what he liked or disliked.

15. The counsels of Maximus taught me to command myself, to judge
clearly, to be of good courage in sickness and other misfortunes, to
be moderate, gentle, yet serious in disposition, and to accomplish my
appointed task without repining. All men believed that he spoke as he
thought; and whatever he did, they knew it was done with good intent.
I never found him surprised or astonished at anything. He was never in
a hurry, never shrank from his purpose, was never at a loss or
dejected. He was no facile smiler, but neither was he passionate or
suspicious. He was ready to do good, to forgive, and to speak the
truth, and gave the impression of unperverted rectitude rather than of
a reformed character. No man could ever think himself despised by
Maximus, and no one ever ventured to think himself his superior. He
had also a good gift of humour.

16. I learned from my father gentleness and undeviating constancy in
judgments formed after due reflection; not to be puffed up with glory
as men understand it; to be laborious and assiduous. He taught me to
give ready hearing to any man who offered anything tending to the
common good; to mete out impartial justice to every one; to apprehend
rightly when severity and when clemency should be used; to abstain
from all impure lusts; and to use humanity towards all men.  Thus he
left his friends at liberty to sup with him or not, to go abroad with
him or not, exactly as they inclined; and they found him still the
same if some urgent business had prevented them from obeying his
commands. I learned of him accuracy and patience in council, for he
never quitted an enquiry satisfied with first impressions. I observed
his zeal to retain his friends without being fickle or over fond; his
contentment in every condition; his cheerfulness; his forethought
about very distant events; his unostentatious attention to the
smallest details; his restraint of all popular applause and
flattery. Ever watchful of the needs of the Empire, a careful steward
of the public revenue, he was tolerant of the censure of others in
affairs of that kind. He was neither a superstitious worshipper of the
Gods, nor an ambitious pleaser of men, nor studious of popularity, but
in all things sober and steadfast, well skilled in what was
honourable, never affecting novelties. As to the things which make the
ease of life, and which fortune can supply in such abundance, he used
them without pride, and yet with all freedom: enjoyed them without
affectation when they were present, and when absent he found no want
of them. No man could call him sophist, buffoon, or pedant. He was a
man of ripe experience, a full man, one who could not be flattered,
and who could govern himself as well as others. I further observed
that he honoured all who were true philosophers, without upbraiding
the rest, and without being led astray by any. His manners were easy,
his conversation delightful, but not cloying. He took regular but
moderate care of his body, neither as one over fond of life or of the
adornment of his person, nor as one who despised these things. Thus,
through his own care, he seldom needed any medicines, whether salves
or potions. It was his special merit to yield without envy to any who
had acquired any special faculty, as either eloquence, or learning in
the Law, in ancient customs, or the like; and he aided such men
strenuously, so that every one of them might be regarded and esteemed
for his special excellence. He observed carefully the ancient customs
of his forefathers, and preserved, without appearance of affectation,
the ways of his native land. He was not fickle and capricious, and
loved not change of place or employment. After his violent fits of
headache he would return fresh and vigorous to his wonted affairs. Of
secrets he had few, and these seldom, and such only as concerned
public matters. He displayed discretion and moderation in exhibiting
shows for the entertainment of the people, in his public works, in
largesses and the like; and in all those things he acted like one who
regarded only what was right and becoming in the things themselves,
and not the reputation that might follow after. He never bathed at
unseasonable hours, had no vanity in building, was never solicitous
either about his food or about the make or colour of his clothes, or
about the beauty of his servants. His dress came from Lorium--his
villa on the coast--and was of Lanuvian wool for the most part. It
is remembered how he used the tax-collector at Tusculum who asked his
pardon, and all his behaviour was of a piece with that. He was far
from being inhuman, or implacable, or violent; never doing anything
with such keenness that one could say he was sweating about it, in all
things he reasoned distinctly, as one at leisure, calmly, regularly,
resolutely, and consistently. A man might fairly apply that to him
which is recorded of Socrates: that he could both abstain from and
enjoy these things, in want whereof many show themselves weak, and, in
the possession, intemperate. To be strong in abstinence and temperate
in enjoyment, to be sober in both--these are qualities of a man of
perfect and invincible soul, as was shown in the sickness of Maximus.

17. To the Gods I owe it that I had good grandfathers and parents, a
good sister, good teachers, good servants, good kinsmen, and friends,
good almost all of them. I have to thank them that I never through
haste and rashness offended any of them; though my temper was such as
might have led me to it had occasion offered. But by their goodness no
such concurrence of circumstances happened as could discover my
weakness. I am further thankful that I was not longer brought up with
my grandfather's concubine, that I retained my modesty, and refrained
even longer than need have been from the pleasures of love. To the
Gods it is due that I lived under the government of such a prince and
father as could take from me all vain glory, and convince me that it
was not impossible for a prince to live in a court without guards,
gorgeous robes, torches, statues, or such pieces of state and
magnificence; but that he may reduce himself almost to the state of a
private man, and yet not become more mean or remiss in those public
affairs wherein power and authority are requisite. I thank the Gods
that I have had such a brother as by his disposition might stir me to
take care of myself, while at the same time he delighted me by his
respect and love. I thank them that my children neither wanted good
natural dispositions nor were deformed in body. I owe it to their good
guidance that I made no greater progress in rhetoric and poetry, and
in other studies which might have engrossed my mind had I found myself
successful in them. By the Gods' grace I forestalled the wishes of
those by whom I was brought up, in promoting them to the dignities
they seemed most to desire; and I did not put them off with the hope
that, since they were but young, I would do it hereafter. I owe to the
Gods that I ever knew Apollonius, Rusticus and Maximus; that I have
had occasion often and effectually to meditate with myself and enquire
what is truly the life according to Nature. And, as far as lies within
the dispensation of the Gods to give suggestion, help, or inspiration,
there is nothing to prevent my having already realized that life. I
have fallen short of it by my own fault, and because I gave no heed to
the inward monitions and almost direct instructions of the Gods, to
whom be thanks that my body hath so long endured the stress of such a
life as I have led. By their goodness I never had to do with either
Benedicta or Theodotus; and afterwards, when I fell into some foolish
passions, I was soon cured. I give thanks that, having often been
displeased with Rusticus, I never did anything to him which afterwards
I might have had occasion to repent; that, though my mother was
destined to die young, she lived with me all her latter years; that,
as often as I inclined to succour any who were either poor or had
fallen into some distress, I was never answered that there was not
ready money enough to do it, and that I myself never had need of the
like succour from another. I must be grateful, too, that I have such a
wife, so obedient, so loving, so ingenuous; that I had choice of fit
and able men to whom I might commit the education of my children. I
have received divine aids in dreams; as in particular, how I might
stay my spitting of blood and cure my vertigo; which good fortune
happily fell to me at Caieta. The Gods watched over me also when I
first applied myself to philosophy. For I fell not into the hands of
any Sophist, nor sat poring over many volumes, nor devoted myself to
solving syllogisms, or star-gazing. That all these things should so
happily fall out there was great need both for the help of fortune and
for the aid of the Gods.

  IN THE COUNTRY OF THE
  QUADI, BY THE GRANUA.

                        END OF THE FIRST BOOK.

                               BOOK II.

1. Say this to yourself in the morning: Today I shall have to do with
meddlers, with the ungrateful, with the insolent, with the crafty,
with the envious and the selfish. All these vices have beset them,
because they know not what is good and what is evil. But I have
considered the nature of the good, and found it beautiful: I have
beheld the nature of the bad, and found it ugly. I also understand the
nature of the evil-doer, and know that he is my brother, not because
he shares with me the same blood or the same seed, but because he is a
partaker of the same mind and of the same portion of immortality. I
therefore cannot be hurt by any of these, since none of them can
involve me in any baseness. I cannot be angry with my brother, or
sever myself from him, for we are made by nature for mutual
assistance, like the feet, the hands, the eyelids, the upper and lower
rows of teeth. It is against nature for men to oppose each other; and
what else is anger and aversion?

2. All that I am is either flesh, breath, or the ruling part. Cast
your books from you; distract yourself no more; for you have not the
right to do so. Like one at the point of death despise this flesh,
this corruptible bone and blood, this network texture of nerves,
veins, and arteries. Consider, too, what breath is--mere air, and
that always changing, expelled and inhaled again every moment. The
third is the ruling part. As to this, take heed, now that you are old,
that it remain no longer in servitude; that it be no more dragged
hither and thither like a puppet by every selfish impulse. Repine no
more at what fate now sends, nor dread what may befall you hereafter.

3. Whatever the Gods ordain is full of wise forethought. The workings
of chance are not apart from nature, and not without connexion and
intertexture with the designs of Providence. Providence is the source
of all things; and, besides, there is necessity, and the utility of
the Universe, of which you are a part. For, to every part of a being,
that is good which springs from the nature of the whole and tends to
its preservation. Now, the order of Nature is preserved in the changes
of elements, just as it is in the changes of things that are
compound. Let this suffice you, and be your creed unchangeable. Put
from you the thirst of books, that you may not die murmuring, but
meekly, and with true and heartfelt gratitude to the Gods.

4. Think of your long procrastination, and of the many opportunities
given you by the Gods, but left unused. Surely it is high time to
understand the Universe of which you are a part, and the Ruler of that
Universe, of whom you are an emanation; that a limit is set to your
days, which, if you use them not for your enlightenment, will depart,
as you yourself will, and return no more.

5. Hourly and earnestly strive, as a Roman and a man, to do what falls
to your hand with perfect unaffected dignity, with kindliness, freedom
and justice, and free your soul from every other imagination. This you
will accomplish if you perform each action as if it were your last,
without wilfulness, or any passionate aversion to what reason
approves; without hypocrisy or selfishness, or discontent with the
decrees of Providence. You see how few things it is necessary to
master in order that a man may live a smooth-flowing, God-fearing
life. For of him that holds to these principles the Gods require no
more.

6. Go on, go on, O my soul, to affront and dishonour thyself! The time
that remains to honour thyself will not be long. Short is the life of
every man; and thine is almost spent; spent, not honouring thyself,
but seeking thy happiness in the souls of other men.

7. Cares from without distract you: take leisure, then, to add some
good thing to your knowledge; have done with vacillation, and avoid
the other error. For triflers, too, are they who, by their activities,
weary themselves in life, and have no settled aim to which they may
direct, once and for all, their every desire and project.

8. Seldom are any found unhappy from not observing what is in the
minds of others. But such as observe not well the stirrings of their
own souls must of necessity be unhappy.

9. Remember always what the nature of the Universe is, what your own
nature is, and how these are related--the one to the other. Remember
what part your qualities are of the qualities of the whole, and that
no man can prevent you from speaking and acting always in accordance
with that nature of which you are a part.

10. In comparing crimes together, as, according to the common idea,
they may be compared, Theophrastus makes the true philosophical
distinction, that those committed from motives of pleasure are more
heinous than those which are due to passion. For he who is a prey to
passion is clearly turned away from reason by some spasm and
convulsion that takes him unawares. But he who sins from desire is
conquered by pleasure, and so seems more incontinent and more
effeminate in his vice. Justly then, and in a truly philosophical
spirit, he says that sin, for pleasure's sake, is more wicked than sin
which is due to pain. For the latter sinner was sinned against, and so
driven to passion by his wrongs, while the former set out to sin of
his own motion, and was led into ill-doing by his own lust.

11. Do every deed, speak every word, think every thought in the
knowledge that you may end your days any moment. To depart from men,
if there be really Gods, is nothing terrible. The Gods could bring no
evil thing upon you. And if there be no Gods, or if they have no
regard to human affairs, why should I desire to live in a world void
of Gods and without Providence? But Gods there are, and assuredly they
regard human affairs; and they have put it wholly in man's power that
he should not fall into what is truly evil. And of other things, had
any been bad, they would have made provision also that man should have
the power to avoid them altogether. For how can that make a man's life
worse which does not corrupt the man himself? Presiding Nature could
not in ignorance, or in knowledge impotent, have omitted to prevent or
rectify these things. She could not fail us so completely that, either
from want of power or want of skill, good and evil should happen
promiscuously to good men and to bad alike. Now death and life, glory
and reproach, pain and pleasure, riches and poverty--all these
happen equally to the good and to the bad. But, as they are neither
honourable nor shameful, they are therefore neither good nor evil.

12. It is the office of our rational power to apprehend how swiftly
all things vanish; how the corporeal forms are swallowed up in the
material world, and the memory of them in the tide of ages. Such are
all the things of sense, especially those which ensnare us with
pleasure or terrify us with pain, or those things which vanity
trumpets in our ears. How mean, how despicable, how sordid, how
perishable, how dead are they! What are they whose opinions and whose
voices bestow renown? What is it to die? Your mind can tell you that,
did a man think of it alone, and, by close consideration, strip it of
its ghastly trappings, he would no longer deem it anything but a work
of Nature. To dread a work of Nature is a childish thing, and this is,
indeed, not only Nature's work, but beneficial to her. Your reason
tells you how man reaches God, and through what part, and what is the
state of that part, when he has attained unto him.

13. Nothing, says the poet, is more miserable than to range over all
things, to spy into the depths of the earth, and search, by
conjecture, into the souls of those around us, yet not to perceive
that it is enough for a man to devote himself to that divinity which
is within him, and to pay it genuine worship. And this worship
consists in keeping it pure from every passion and folly, and from
repining at anything done by Gods or men. The work of the Gods is to
be reverenced for its excellence. The works of men should be dear for
the sake of the bond of kinship, or pitied, as we must pity them
sometimes, for their lack of the knowledge of good and evil. And men
are not less maimed by this defect than by their want of power to know
white from black.

14. Though you should live three thousand ears or as many myriads, yet
remember that no man loses any other life than that which now lives,
nor lives any other than that which he is now losing. The longest and
the shortest lives come to one effect. The present moment is the same
for all men, and their loss, therefore, is equal, for it is clear that
what they lose in death is but a fleeting instant of time. No man can
lose either the past or the future, for how can a man be deprived of
what he has not? These two things then are to be remembered: First,
that all things recur in cycles, and are the same from everlasting,
and that, therefore, it matters nothing whether a man shall
contemplate these same things for one hundred years, or for two
hundred, or for an infinite stretch of time: and, secondly, that he
who lives longest and he who dies soonest have an equal loss in
death. The present moment is all of which either is deprived, since
that is all he has. No man can be robbed of that which he has not.

15. Beyond opinion there is nothing. The objections to this saying of
Monimus the Cynic are obvious. But obvious also is the utility of what
he said, if one accept his pleasantry as far as truth will warrant it.

16. Man's soul dishonours itself, firstly and chiefly when it does all
it can to become an excrescence, and as it were an abscess on the
Universe. To fret against any particular event is to revolt against
the general law of Nature, which comprehends the order of all events
whatsoever. Again it is dishonour for the soul when it has aversion to
any man, and opposes him with intention to hurt him, as wrathful men
do. Thirdly, it affronts itself when conquered by pleasure or pain;
fourthly, when it does or says anything hypocritically, feignedly or
falsely; fifthly, when it does not direct to some proper end all its
desires and actions, but exerts them inconsiderately and without
understanding. For, even the smallest things should be referred to the
end, and the end of rational beings is to follow the order and law of
the venerable state and polity which comprehends them all.

17. The duration of man's life is but an instant; his substance is
fleeting, his senses dull; the structure of his body corruptible; the
soul but a vortex. We cannot reckon with fortune, or lay our account
with fame. In fine, the life of the body is but a river, and the life
of the soul a misty dream. Existence is a warfare, and a journey in a
strange land; and the end of fame is to be forgotten. What then avails
to guide us? One thing, and one alone--Philosophy. And this consists
in keeping the divinity within inviolate and intact; victorious over
pain and pleasure; free from temerity, free from falsehood, free from
hypocrisy; independent of what others do or fail to do; submissive to
hap and lot, which come from the same source as we; and, above all,
with equanimity awaiting death, as nothing else than a resolution of
the elements of which every being compounded. And, if in their
successive interchanges no harm befall the elements, why should one
suspect any in the change and dissolution of the whole? It is natural,
and nothing natural can be evil.

  AT CARNUNTUM.

                       END OF THE SECOND BOOK.


                              BOOK III.

1. Man must consider, not only that each day part of his life is
spent, and that less and less remains to him, but also that, even if
he live longer, it is very uncertain whether his intelligence will
suffice as heretofore for the understanding of his affairs, and for
grasping that knowledge which aims at comprehending things human and
divine. When dotage begins, breath, nourishment, fancy, impulse, and
so forth will not fail him. But self-command, accurate appreciation of
duty, power to scrutinize what strikes his senses, or even to decide
whether he should take his departure, all powers, indeed, which demand
a well-trained understanding, must be extinguished in him. Let him be
up and doing then, not only because death comes nearer every day, but
because understanding and intelligence often leave us before we die.

2. Observe what grace and charm appear even in the accidents that
accompany Nature's work. Thus some parts of a loaf crack and burst in
the baking; and this cracking, though in a manner contrary to the
design of the baker, looks well and invites the appetite. Figs, too,
gape when at their ripest, and in ripe olives the very approach to
rotting adds a special beauty to the fruit. The droop of ears of corn,
the bent brows of the lion, the foam at a boar's mouth, and many other
things, are far from comely in themselves, yet, since they accompany
the works of Nature, they make part of her adornment, and rejoice the
beholder. Thus, if a man be sensitive to such things, and have a more
than common penetration into the constitution of the whole, scarce
anything connected with Nature will fail to give him pleasure, as he
comes to understand it. Such a man will contemplate in the real world
the fierce jaws of wild beasts with no less delight than when
sculptors or painters set forth for him their presentments. With like
pleasure will his chaste eyes behold the maturity and grace of old age
in man or woman, and the inviting charms of youth. Many such things
will strike him, things not credible to the many, but which come to
him alone who is truly familiar with the works of Nature and near to
her own heart.

3. Hippocrates, who had healed many diseases, himself fell sick, and
died. The Chaldeans foretold the fatal hours of multitudes, and
afterwards fate carried themselves away. Alexander, Pompey, and Gaius
Caesar, who so often razed whole cities, and cut off in battle so many
myriads of horse and foot, at last departed from this life
themselves. Heraclitus, after his many speculations on the
conflagration of the world, died, swollen with water and plastered
with cow-dung. Vermin destroyed Democritus; Socrates was killed by
vermin of another sort. What of all this? You have gone aboard, made
your voyage, come to harbour. Disembark: if into another life, there
will God be also; if into nothingness, at least you will have done
with bearing pain and pleasure, and with your slavery to this vessel
so much meaner than its slave. For the soul is intelligence and deity,
the body dust and corruption.

4. Waste not what remains of life in consideration about others, when
it makes not for the common good. Be sure you are neglecting other
work if you busy yourself with what such a one is doing and why, with
what he is saying, thinking, or scheming. All such things do but
divert you from the steadfast guardianship of your own soul. It
behoves you, then, in every train of thought to shun all that is
aimless or useless, and, above all, everything officious or
malignant. Accustom yourself so, and only so, to think, that, if any
one were suddenly to ask you, "Of what are you thinking-now?" you
could answer frankly and at once, "Of so and so." Then it will plainly
appear that you are all simplicity and kindliness, as befits a social
being who takes little thought for enjoyment or any phantom pleasure;
who spurns contentiousness, envy, or suspicion; or any passion the
harbouring of which one would blush to own. For such a man, who has
finally determined to be henceforth among the best, is, as it were, a
priest and minister of the Gods, using the spirit within him, which
preserves a man unspotted from pleasure, unwounded by any pain,
inaccessible to all insult, innocent of all evil; a champion in the
noblest of all contests--the contest for victory over every
passion. He is penetrated with justice; he welcomes with all his heart
whatever befalls, or is appointed by Providence. He troubles not
often, or ever without pressing public need, to consider what another
may say, or do, or design. Solely intent upon his own conduct, ever
mindful of his own concurrent part in the destiny of the Universe, he
orders his conduct well, persuaded that his part is good. For the lot
appointed to every man is part of the law of all things as well as a
law for him. He forgets not that all rational beings are akin, and
that the love of all mankind is part of the nature of man; also that
we must not think as all men think, but only as those who live a life
accordant with nature. As for those who live otherwise, he remembers
always how they act at home and abroad, by night and by day, and how
and with whom they are found in company. And so he cannot esteem the
praise of such, for they enjoy not their own approbation.

5. In action be neither grudging, nor selfish, nor ill-advised, nor
constrained. Let not your thought be adorned with overmuch nicety. Be
not a babbler or a busybody. Let the God within direct you as a manly
being, as an elder, a statesman, a Roman, and a ruler, standing
prepared like one who awaits the recall from life, in marching order;
requiring neither an oath nor the testimony of any man. And withal, be
cheerful, and independent of the assistance and the peace that comes
from others; for, it is a man's duty to stand upright, self-supporting,
not supported.

6. If in the life of man you find anything better than justice, truth,
sobriety, manliness; and, in sum, anything better than the
satisfaction of your soul with itself in that wherein it is given to
you to follow right reason; and with fate in that which is determined
beyond your control; if, I say, you find aught better than this, then
turn thereto with all your heart, and enjoy it as the best that is to
be found. But if nothing seems to you better than the divinity seated
within you, which has conquered all your impulses, which sifts all
your thoughts, which, as Socrates said, has detached itself from the
promptings of sense, and devoted itself to God and to the love of
mankind; if you find every other thing small and worthless compared
with this, see that you give place to no other which might turn,
divert, or distract you from holding in highest esteem the good which
is especially and properly your own. For it is not permitted to us to
substitute for that which is good in reason or in fact anything not
agreeable thereto, such as the praise of the many, power, riches, or
the pursuit of pleasure. All these things may seem admissible for a
moment; but presently they get the upper hand, and lead us astray. But
do you, I say, frankly and freely choose the best, and keep to it. The
best is what is for your advantage. If now you choose what is for your
spiritual advantage, hold it fast; if what is for your bodily
advantage, admit that it is so chosen, and keep your choice with all
modesty. Only see that you make a sure discrimination.

7. Never esteem aught of advantage which will oblige you to break your
faith, or to desert your honour; to hate, to suspect, or to execrate
any man; to play a part; or to set your mind on anything that needs to
be hidden by wall or curtain. He who to all things prefers the soul,
the divinity within him, and the sacred cult of its virtues, makes no
tragic groan or gesture. He needs neither solitude nor a crowd of
spectators; and, best of all, he will live neither seeking nor
shunning death. Whether the soul shall use its surrounding body for a
longer or shorter space is to him indifferent. Were he to depart this
moment he would go as readily as he would do any other seemly and
proper action, holding one thing only in life-long avoidance--to find
his soul in any case unbefitting an intelligent social being.

8. In the soul of the chastened and purified man you would find
nothing putrid, foul, or festering. Fate does not cut off his life
before its proper end; as one would say of an actor who left the stage
before his part was ended, or he had reached his appointed exit. There
remains nothing servile or affected, nothing too conventional or too
seclusive, nothing that fears censure or courts concealment.

9. Hold in honour the faculty which forms opinions. It depends on this
faculty alone that no opinion your soul entertains be inconsistent
with the nature and constitution of the rational being. It ensures
that we form no rash judgments, that we are kindly to men, and
obedient to the Gods.

10. Cast from you then all other things, retaining these few. Remember
also that every man lives only this present moment, which is a
fleeting instant: the rest of time is either spent or quite
unknown. Short is the time which each of us has to live, and small the
corner of the earth he has to live in.  Short is the longest
posthumous fame, and this preserved through a succession of poor
mortals, soon themselves to die; men who knew not themselves, far less
those who died long ago.

11. To these maxims add this other. Accurately define or describe
every thing that strikes your imagination, so that you may see and
distinguish what it is in naked essence, and what it is in its
entirety; that you may tell yourself the proper name of the thing
itself, and the names of the parts of which it is compounded, and into
which it will be resolved. Nothing makes mind greater than the power
to enquire into all things that present themselves in life; and, while
you examine them, to consider at the same time of what fashion is the
Universe, and what is the function in it of these things, of what
importance they are to the whole, of what to man who is a citizen of
that highest city of which all other cities are but households.
Consider what is this thing that now makes an impression on you, of
what it is composed, and how long it is destined to endure. Consider
also for what virtue it calls; whether it be gentleness, courage,
truthfulness, fidelity, simplicity, independence, or any other. Say,
therefore, of each event: "This comes from God:" or "This comes from
the conjunction and intertexture of the strands of fate, or from some
chance or hazard of that kind:" or "This comes from one of my own
tribe, from my kinsman, from my friend. He is, indeed, ignorant of
what accords with nature; but I am not, and will therefore use him
kindly and justly, according to the natural and social law. As to
things indifferent, I strive to appraise them at their proper value."

12. If you discharge your present duty with firm and zealous, yet
kindly, observance of the laws of reason; if you regard no by-gains,
but keep pure within you your immortal part, as if obliged to restore
it at once to him who gave it; if you hold to this with no further
desires or aversions, and be content with the natural discharge of
your present task, and with the heroic sincerity of all you say or
utter, you will live well. And herein no man can hinder you.

13. As surgeons have ever their knives and instruments at hand for the
sudden emergencies of their art, so do you keep ready the principles
requisite for understanding things divine and human, and for doing all
things, even the least important, in the remembrance of the bond
between the two. For in neglecting this, you will scant your duty both
to Gods and men.

14. Cease your wandering, for you are not like to read again your own
memoirs, or the deeds of the ancient Greeks and Romans, or those
collections from the writings of others that you laid up for your old
age. Hasten then to your proper end. Fling away vain hopes, and, if
you have any care for yourself, fly to your own succour while yet you
may.

15. Men understand not all that is signified by the words--to steal,
to sow, to buy, to rest, to see what is to be done. For it is not the
bodily eye but another sort of sight that must discern these things.

16. We have body, soul, and intelligence. To the body belong the
senses, to the soul the passions, to the intelligence principles. To
be affected by the imagery of sense belongs to the beasts of the field
no less than to us. To be swayed by gusts of passion is common to us
with the wild beasts, with the most effeminate wretches, with Nero and
with Phalaris. Moreover, the possession of a mind to guide us to what
seems fitting is shared by us, with atheists, with traitors to their
country, and with such as shut their doors and sin. If, then, all the
rest is common as we have seen, there remains to the good man this
special excellence; to welcome with pleasure all that happens or is
ordained, not to defile the divinity enthroned in his breast, not to
perturb it with a crowd of images, but to preserve it in tranquillity,
and obey it as a God: to observe truth in all he says, and justice in
his every action. And though others may not believe that he lives thus
in simplicity, modesty, and contentment, he neither takes this
unbelief amiss from any one, nor quits the road which leads to the
true end of life, at which he ought to arrive pure, calm, ready to
take his departure, and accommodated without compulsion to his fate.

                        END OF THE THIRD BOOK.


                               BOOK IV.

1. The power which rules within us, when its state is accordant with
nature, so acts in every occurrence as easily to adapt itself to all
present or possible situations. It requires no set material to work
upon, but, under proper reservation, needs but the incitement to
pursue, and makes matter for its activities out of every
opposition. Even so a fire masters that which is cast upon it, and
though a small flame would have been extinguished, your great blaze
quickly makes the added fuel its own, consumes it, and grows mightier
therefrom.

2. Let no action be done at random, nor otherwise than in complete
accordance with the principles involved.

3. Men seek retirement in the country, on the sea-coast, in the
mountains; and you too have frequent longings for such distractions.
Yet surely this is great folly, since you may retire into yourself at
any hour you please. Nowhere can a man find any retreat more quiet and
more full of leisure than in his own soul; especially when there is
that within it on which, if he but look, he is straightway quite at
rest. And rest I hold to be naught else but perfect order in the
soul. Constantly, therefore, allow yourself this retirement, and so
renew yourself. Have also at hand thoughts brief and fundamental,
which readily may occur; sufficing to shut out the discordant clamour
of the world, and to send you back without fretting at the task to
which you return. For at what do you fret? At the wickedness of
mankind. Recollect the maxim that all reasoning beings are created for
one another, that to bear with them is a part of justice, and that
they cannot help their sin. Remember how many of those who lived in
enmity, suspicion, and hatred, at daggers drawn, have been stretched
on their funeral pyres, and turned to ashes. Remember and cease from
your complaints. Is it your allotted part in the world's destiny that
chagrins you? Be calm, and renew your knowledge of the alternative,
that "Either providence directs the world, or there is nothing but
unguided atoms;" and recollect the many proofs that the Universe is as
it were a state. Do the ills of the body still have power to touch
you? Reflect that the mind, once withdrawn within itself, once grown
conscious of its own power, has no concern with the motions, rough or
smooth, of the breathing body. Remember, too, all that you have heard
and assented to concerning pain and pleasure. Are you distracted by
the poor thing called fame? Think how swiftly all things are
forgotten. Behold the chaos of eternity which besets us on either
side. Think how empty is the noisy echo of acclamation; how fickle and
how scant of judgment are they who would seem to praise us, and how
narrow the bounds within which their praise is confined. All the earth
is but a point in the Universe; how small a corner of that little is
inhabited, and even there how few are they and of how little worth who
are to praise us!  Remember then that there ever remains for you
retirement into the little field within. And, above all, be neither
distraught nor overstrained. Hold fast your freedom: consider all
things as a man of courage, as a human being, as a citizen, as a
mortal. Readiest among the principles to which you look let there be
these two: Firstly, things external do not touch the soul, but remain
powerless without; and all trouble comes from what we think of them
within. Secondly, all things visible change in a moment, and are gone
for ever. Recollect all the changes of which you have yourself been a
witness. The world is a succession of changes: life is but thought.

4. If mind be common to us all, the reason in virtue of which we are
rational is also common; so too is the power which bids us do or not
do. Therefore we have all a common law; and if so, we are
fellow-citizens and members of some common polity. The Universe, then,
must in a manner be a state, for of what other common polity can all
mankind be said to be members? Wherefore it is from this common state
that we derive our intellectual power, our reason, and our law; or
whence do we derive them? For that which is earthy in me is derived
from earth, my moisture from some other element, my breath and what is
warm or fiery from their proper sources. And therefore, as nothing can
arise from nothing or return thereto, my intellectual part has also a
source.

5. Death, like birth, is a mystery of nature; the one a compounding of
elements, the other a resolution into the same. In neither is there
anything shameful or against the nature of the rational animal, or
contrary to the law of its constitution.

6. It is fate that such actions should come from such men. He who
would have it otherwise would have figs without juice. This, too, you
should remember: that in a very short time both you and he must die;
and a little after not even the name of either shall remain.

7. Suppress the thought; and the cry "I am hurt!" is gone. Suppress "I
am hurt!" and you suppress the injury.

8. What makes not a man worse than he was, makes not his life worse,
nor hurts him without or within.

9. The law of utility must act so.

10. All that happens, happens right: you will find it so if you
observe narrowly. I mean not only according to a natural order, but
according to our idea of justice, and, as it were, by the action of
one who distributes according to merit. Go on then observing this as
you have begun, and whatever you do, let your aim be goodness,
goodness as it is rightly understood. Hold to this in every action.

11. Think not as your insulter judges or wishes you to judge: but see
things as they truly are.

12. For two things be ever ready: First, to do that only which reason,
the sovereign and legislative faculty, suggests for the good of
mankind: Secondly, to change your course on meeting any one who can
correct and alter your opinion. But let the change be made because you
really believe it to be in the interest of justice or the public good,
or such like, and not with any view to pleasure or glory for yourself.

13. Have you reason? I have. Why then do you not use it? When it
performs its proper office what more do you require?

14. You exist as part of a whole. You will disappear again in that
which produced you; or rather you will change and be resumed again
into the productive intelligence.

15. Many grains of frankincense are laid on the same altar. One falls
soon, another later. It makes no difference.

16. Within ten days, if you return to the observance of moral
principles and to the cult of reason, you will appear a God to them
who now esteem you a wild beast or an ape.

17. Order not your life as though you had ten thousand years to
live. Fate hangs over you. While you live, while yet you may, be good.

18. How much he gains in leisure who looks not to what his neighbours
say, or do, or intend; but considers only how his own actions may be
just and holy, looking not, as Agathon says, to the moral example of
others, but running a straight course and never turning therefrom.

19. He who is careful and troubled about the fame which is to live
after him considers not that each one of those who remember him must
very soon die himself, and thereafter also the succeeding generation,
until every memory of him, handed on by excited and ephemeral
admirers, dies utterly away. Grant that your memory were immortal, and
those immortal who retain it; yet what is that to you? I ask not, what
is that to the dead? But to the living what is the profit in praise,
except it be in some convenience that it brings? And you now abandon
what nature has put in your power in order to set your hopes upon the
report of others.

20. Whatever is beautiful at all is beautiful in itself. Its beauty
ends there, and praise has no part in it. Nothing is the better or the
worse for being praised; and this holds also of what is beautiful in
the common estimation: of material forms and works of art. Thus true
beauty needs nothing beyond itself, any more than law, or truth, or
kindness, or honour. For none of these gets a single grace from praise
or one blot from censure. Does the emerald lose its virtue if one
praise it not? Can one by scanting praise depreciate gold, ivory, or
purple, a lyre or a dagger, a flower or a shrub?

21. If our souls survive us, how, you ask, has the air contained them
from eternity? How, I answer, does the earth contain so many bodies
buried during so long a time? Just as corpses, after remaining for a
while in the earth, change, and are dissipated to make room for
others; so also the souls, liberated into air, remain for a little,
and then are changed, diffused, rekindled, and resumed into the
universal productive spirit; and so give way to others who come to
take their places. This may serve for an answer, on the supposition
that the soul survives the body. But we have not merely to consider
the number of bodies thus buried in the earth. There are also all the
living creatures eaten day by day by ourselves and other animals. How
great a multitude of them is thus consumed, and as it were buried in
the bodies of those who feed upon them. Yet there is ever space to
contain them, owing to the changes into blood, air, and fire. What,
then, is the key to this enquiry? Discrimination of matter and cause.

22. Swerve not from your path. In every impulse render justice its
due, and in all thinking be sure that you understand.

23. I am in tune with all that is of thy harmony, O Nature. For me
nothing is too early and nothing is too late that comes in thy good
time. All is fruit to me, O Nature, that thy seasons bring. From thee
are all things, thou comprehendest all, and all returns to thee. The
poet says, "O dear City of Cecrops!" Shall I not say, "Dear City of
God!"

24. "Do few things," says the philosopher, "if you would have quiet."
This is perhaps a better saying, "Do what is necessary, do what the
reason of the being that is social in its nature directs, and do it in
the spirit of that direction." By this you will attain the calm that
comes from virtuous action, and that calm also which comes from having
few things to do. Most things you say and do are not necessary. Have
done with them, and you will be more at leisure and less perturbed. On
every occasion, then, ask yourself the question, Is this thing not
unnecessary? And put away not only unnecessary deeds but unnecessary
thoughts, for by so doing you will avoid all superfluous actions.

25. Make trial how the life of a good man succeeds with you, the life
of one who is content with the lot appointed him by Providence, and
satisfied with the justice of his own actions and the benevolence of
his disposition.

26. You have seen the other state, make trial also of this. Avoid
perplexity; seek simplicity. Has a man sinned? He bears his own
sin. Has aught befallen you? It is well; for all that befalls you is
an ordained part in the weaving of the destiny of all things from the
beginning. In sum, life is short. Make the best of the present in
reason and in justice. Be sober in your relaxation.

27. The Universe is either an ordered whole or a confusion. But,
although a mixture of phenomena, it is certainly an ordered whole. Or,
do you think that there can be order in you and confusion in the
Universe, and that too when all things, though diffused and separated,
are all in sympathy, one with another?

28. Consider the deformity of these characters: the black or
malicious, the effeminate, the savage, the beastly, the childish, the
brutish, the stupid, the false, the ribald, the knavish, the
tyrannical.

29. He is a foreigner, and not a citizen of the world, who knows not
what the world contains; and he, too, who knows not what happens in
it. He is a deserter who flies from the reason that rules this
polity. He is blind, whose intellectual eye is closed. He is a beggar,
who needs the gifts of others, and has not from himself all that is
necessary for life. He is an excrescence on the scheme of things, who
withdraws and separates himself from the reasoned constitution of the
nature in which he shares, by discontent with what befalls. That same
nature which produces this event produced thee. He is the seditious
citizen who separates his particular soul from the one soul of all
reasonable beings.

30. One acts the philosopher without a coat, another without books, a
third half-naked. Says one, "I have not bread, and yet I hold to
reason." Says another, "I have not even the spiritual food of
instruction, and yet I hold to it."

31. Love the art which you have learned, humble though it be, and in
it find your recreation. And spend the remainder of your life as one
who with all his heart commits his concerns to the Gods, and neither
acts the tyrant nor the slave to any of mankind.

32. Recall, for example, the age of Vespasian. It is as the spectacle
of our own time. You will see men marrying, bringing up children, sick
and dying, warring and feasting, trading and farming. You will see men
flattering, obstinate in their own will, suspecting, plotting, wishing
for the death of others, repining at fortune, courting mistresses,
hoarding treasure, pursuing consulships and kingdoms. Yet all that
life is spent and gone. Come down to Trajan's days. Again all is the
same; and again, that life, too, is dead. Consider, likewise, the
records of other times and nations, and see how, after their fit of
eagerness, all quickly fell, and were resolved into the elements. But
most of all, remember those whom you yourself have known, men who were
distracted about vain things, men who neglected the course which
suited their own nature, neither holding fast to it nor finding their
contentment there. And, herein, forget not that care is to be bestowed
on any enterprise only in proportion to its proper worth. For if you
keep this in mind you will not be disheartened from over concern with
things of less account.

33. The familiar phrases of old days are now strange and obsolete;
and, likewise, the names of such as were once much celebrated now
sound strangely in our ears. Camillus, Caeso, Volesus, Leonnatus;
after them Scipio and Cato; lastly, Augustus, Hadrian, and
Antonine--all are forgotten. All things hasten to an end, shall
speedily seem old fables, and then be buried in oblivion. This I say
of those who have shone with the brightness of their fame. The rest of
men, as soon as they expire, are unknown and forgotten. What, then, is
it to be remembered for ever? A wholly empty thing. For what should we
be zealous? For this alone, that our souls be just, our actions
unselfish, our speech ever sincere, and our disposition such as may
cheerfully embrace whatever happens, seeing it to be inevitable,
familiar, and sprung from the same source and origin as we ourselves.

34. Willingly resign yourself to Clotho, permitting her to spin her
thread of what yarn she may.

35. All things are for a day, both what remembers and what is
remembered.

36. Observe continually that all things exist in change; and keep this
thought ever with you, that Nature loves nothing more than changing
what things now are, and making others like them. For what now is, is
in a manner the seed of what shall be. Therefore, conceive not that
that alone is seed which is cast into the earth or the womb, for that
is the thought of ignorance.

37. You are presently to die, and yet you have not attained to
simplicity or calm, or to disbelief that you can be hurt by things
external. You have not learned to be kindly to all men, or to count
just dealing the whole of wisdom.

38. Scan closely that which governs men; see what are their cares, and
what they pursue or shun.

39. That which is evil for you exists not in the soul of another; nor
in any change or alteration of the body which surrounds you. Where,
then, is it? It lies in that part of you by which you apprehend what
evil is. Stay the apprehension, and all is well. And though the poor
body to which it is so closely bound be cut and burned, though it
suppurate or mortify, yet let the apprehension remain inactive: that
is, let it judge nothing either bad or good which can happen equally
to the bad man and to the good. For that which befalls equally him who
lives in accord, and him who lives in discord with Nature, can neither
be natural nor unnatural.

40. Ever consider this Universe as one living being, with one material
substance and one spirit. Observe how all things are referred to the
one intelligence of this being; how all things act on one impulse; how
all things are concurrent causes of all others; and how all things are
connected and intertwined.

41. "Thou art a poor soul, saddled with a corpse," said Epictetus.

42. There is no evil for things which subsist in change; and there can
be no good for things which subsist without it.

43. Time is a river, a violent torrent of things coming into
being. Each one, as soon as it has appeared, is swept away: it is
succeeded by another which is swept away in its turn.

44. All that happens is as natural and familiar as a rose in spring,
or fruit in summer. Such are disease and death, calumny and treachery,
and all else which gives fools joy or sorrow.

45. Consequents follow antecedents by virtue of a special and
necessary connexion. This relation is not that which exists in a mere
enumeration of independent things, and depends merely on some
arbitrary convention. It is a rational relationship. And just as
things now existing are ranged harmoniously together, so those which
come into existence display no bare succession, but a wonderful
harmony with what preceded.

46. Remember always the sayings of Heraclitus: that the death of earth
is to become water, the death of water to become air, and the death of
air to become fire; and so conversely. Remember in what a case he is
who forgets whither the way leads: that men are frequently at variance
with their close and constant companion, the reason which rules all:
that men count strange that which they meet every day: that we should
neither act nor speak as though in slumber, although even in slumber
we seem to act and speak; nor yet like children learning from their
parents, with a mere acceptance of everything just as we are told it.

47. If some God were to inform you that you must die tomorrow, or the
next day at farthest, you would take little concern whether it was to
be tomorrow or the next day; that is if you were not the most
miserable of cowards. For how small is the difference? Wherefore,
account it of no great moment whether you die after many years or
tomorrow.

48. Constantly consider how many physicians are dead and gone, who
frequently knitted their brows over their patients; how many
astrologers, who foretold the deaths of others with great ostentation
of their art; how many philosophers, who wrote endlessly on death and
immortality; how many warriors, who slew their thousands; and how many
tyrants, who used their power of life and death with cruel wantonness,
as though they had been immortal. How many whole cities, if I may so
speak, are dead: Helice and Pompeii and Herculaneum, and others past
counting. Tell over next all those you have known, one after the
other: think how one buried his fellow, then lay dead himself, to be
buried by a third. And all this within a little time. In sum, look
upon human things, and behold how short-lived and how vile they are;
mucus yesterday, tomorrow ashes or pickled carrion. Spend, then, the
fleeting remnant of your time in a spirit that accords with Nature,
and depart contentedly. So the olive falls when it is grown ripe,
blessing the ground from whence it sprung, and thankful to the tree
that bore it.

49. Be like a promontory against which the waves are always
breaking. It stands fast, and stills the waters that rage around
it. "Wretched am I," says one, "that this has befallen me." "Nay," say
you, "happy am I who, though this has befallen me, can still remain
without sorrow, neither broken by the present nor dreading the
future." The like might have befallen any one; but every one would not
have endured it unpained. Why, then, should we dwell more on the
misfortune of the incident than on the felicity of such strength of
mind? Can you call that a misfortune for a man which is not a
miscarriage of his nature?  And can you call anything a miscarriage of
his nature which is not contrary to its purpose? You have learned its
purpose, have you not?  Then does this accident debar you from
justice, magnanimity, prudence, wisdom, caution, truth, honour,
freedom, and all else in the possession of which man's nature finds
its full estate? Remember, therefore, for the future, upon all
occasions of sorrow, to use the maxim: this thing is not misfortune,
but to bear it bravely is good fortune.

50. It is a vulgar meditation, and yet very effectual for enabling us
to despise death, to consider the fate of those who have been most
earnestly tenacious of life, and enjoyed it longest. Wherein is their
gain greater than that of those who died before their time? They are
all lying dead somewhere or other. Cadicianus, Fabius, Julian,
Lepidus, and their fellows, saw the corpses of multitudes carried to
the grave, and then themselves were carried thither. In sum, how small
was the difference of time, spent painfully amid what troubles, among
what worthless men, and in how mean a carcase! Think it not a thing of
value. Rather look back into the eternity that gapes behind, and
forward into the other abyss of immensity. Compared with such
infinity, small is the difference between a life of three days and one
of three ages like Nestor's.

51. Run ever the short way. The short way is the way according to
Nature. Therefore speak and act according to the soundest rule; for
this resolution will free you from much toil and warring, and from all
artful management and ostentation.

                       END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.


                               BOOK V.

1. In the morning, when you find yourself unwilling to rise, have this
thought at hand: I arise to the proper business of man, and shall I
repine at setting about that work for which I was born and brought
into the world? Am I equipped for nothing but to lie among the
bed-clothes and keep warm? "But," you say, "it is more pleasant so."
Is pleasure, then, the object of your being, and not action, and the
exercise of your powers? Do you not see the smallest plants, the
little sparrows, the ants, the spiders, the bees, all doing their
part, and working for order in the Universe, as far as in them lies?
And will you refuse the part in this design which is laid on man? Will
you not pursue the course which accords with your own nature? You say,
"I must have rest." Assuredly; but nature appoints a measure for rest,
just as for eating and drinking. In rest you go beyond these limits,
and beyond what is enough; but in action you do not fill the measure,
and remain well within your powers. You do not love yourself; if you
did, you would love your nature and its purpose. Others, who love the
art that they have made their own, exhaust themselves with labouring
at it unwashed and unfed. But you honour your own nature less than the
carver honours his carving, less than the dancer honours his dancing,
the miser his gold, or the vain man his empty fame. These men, when
desire takes them, count food and sleep well lost if they can better
realize the object of their longings; and shall the pursuit of the
common good seem less precious in your eyes and worthy of a lesser
zeal?

2. How easy it is to thrust away and blot out each impression that is
disturbing and unfit; and forthwith to enjoy perfect tranquillity.

3. Judge no speech or action unworthy of you which is consistent with
nature. Be not dissuaded by any consequent criticism or censure from
others; but, if the speech or action be honourable, judge yourself
worthy to say or do it. Those who criticize you have their own
conscience and their own motives. These you are not to regard, but
follow a straight course, guided by your own nature and the nature of
the Universe, both of which point the same way.

4. I walk the way which is Nature's, until at last I shall fall and be
at rest; breathing out my breath into the air wherefrom I daily drew
it, falling on that earth whence my father drew his seed, my mother
her blood, and my nurse the milk which nourished me; on that earth
which has given me my daily food and drink through all these years,
which sustains my footsteps, and bears with me--her manifold abuser.

5. Men cannot admire you for your shrewdness. Be it so. But there is
many another quality of which you cannot say, "It is not in me."
Display these; they are wholly in your power. Be sincere, be
dignified, be painstaking; scorn pleasure, repine not at fate, need
little; be kind and frank; love not exaggeration and vain talk; strive
after greatness. Do you not see how many virtues you might show, of
which you are yet content to fall short, though you have not the
excuse that they are absent, or that you are unfit for them? Are you
driven by some want in your equipment to be querulous, to be miserly,
to be a flatterer, to reproach your body with your own faults, to
cringe to others, to be vainglorious, to have all this restlessness in
your soul? No, by the Gods, you might have escaped these vices long
ago. All your fault, then, is that you are somewhat slow and dull of
comprehension. This you should strive to correct by exercise; neither
neglecting your dulness nor taking a mean pleasure in it.

6. Some men, when they have done you a favour, are very ready to
reckon up the obligation they have conferred. Others, again, are not
so forward in their claims, but yet in their minds consider you their
debtor, and well know the value of what they have done. A third sort
seem to be unconscious of their service. They are like the vine, which
produces its clusters and is satisfied when it has yielded its proper
fruit. The horse when he has run his course, the hound when he has
followed the track, the bee when it has made its honey, and the man
when he has done good to others, make no noisy boast of it, but set
out to do the same once more, as the vine in its season produces its
new clusters again. "Should we, then, be among those who in a manner
know not what they do?" Assuredly. "But this very thing implies
intelligence; for it is a property of the unselfish man to perceive
that he is acting unselfishly, and, surely, to wish his fellow also to
perceive it." True, but if you misapprehend my saying, you will enter
the ranks of those of whom I spoke before. They, too, are led astray
by specious reasonings. But if you have the will to understand what my
principle truly means, fear not that in following it you will neglect
the duty of unselfishness.

7. This is a prayer of the Athenians: "Rain, rain, dear Zeus, on the
plains and ploughlands of the Athenians." Man should either not pray
at all, or pray after this frank and simple fashion.

8. Just as one says that Aesculapius has prescribed a course of riding
for some one, or the cold bath, or walking bare-footed; so it may be
said that the guiding Mind prescribes for a man, disease, or
mutilation, or losses, or the like. "Prescribed," in the first case,
means that such treatment was enjoined on the patient as might
coincide with the needs of his health: in the second case it means
that each man's fortune is appointed to coincide with the purposes of
fate. Now, the very word "coincidence" implies something like that
correspondence of squared stones in a wall or pyramid, which workmen
speak of when they fit them together in some structure. All things are
united in one bond of harmony; and just as all existing bodies go to
make the visible world what it is, so destiny, as the general cause,
is compounded of all particular causes. The most unphilosophical grasp
my meaning, for they say, "Fate gave this to so-and-so: this was
appointed or prescribed for him." Let us, then, receive the decrees of
Fate as we receive the prescriptions of Aesculapius. He prescribes
many things for us, and some of them are harsh medicines. Yet we obey
him gladly in the hope of health. Conceive therefore that, for Nature,
the doing of her work and the fulfilling of her purposes are, as it
were, her health; and welcome all that happens, even should it seem
hard fortune, because it tends to the health of the Universe, and to
the prosperity and felicity of Zeus. He would not have brought this or
that on any man did it not contribute to the good of the whole, nor
does any part of Nature's system bring aught to pass which suits not
with her government. For two reasons, then, you should content
yourself with what befalls you. The first is, that it was created and
ordained for you, and was in a manner related to you from the
beginning, in the weaving of all destinies from the great first
causes. The second is, that even what happens severally to each man
contributes to the well-being and prosperity of the Mind which governs
all things, and, indeed, even to its continued existence. For the
whole is maimed if you break in the slightest degree this continuous
connexion, whether of parts or causes. And this you are doing your
best to break and to destroy whenever you repine at fate.

9. Fret not, neither despond nor be disheartened, if it be not always
possible for you to act according to your principles of perfection. If
you are beaten off, return again to the effort, and content yourself
that your conduct is generally such as becomes a man. Love the good to
which you return; and come back to Philosophy, not as one who comes to
a master, but as one whose eyes ache recurs to sponge and egg, as
another has recourse to plasters, or a third to fomentation. And thus
you will make no empty show of obeying reason; but find that it gives
you rest. Remember that Philosophy demands no more than what your
nature requires. But you are wont to desire other things which accord
not with your nature. "For what," you say, "can be more delightful
than such things?" Is not this the very snare which Pleasure sets for
us? Yet consider if magnanimity, frankness, simplicity, kindness, and
piety be not even greater delights. And what is sweeter than wisdom
itself, when you are conscious of security and felicity in your powers
of apprehension and reason?

10. The natures of things are so covered up from us, that to many
philosophers, and these no mean ones, all things seem incomprehensible.
The Stoics themselves own that it is difficult to comprehend anything
with certainty. All our assent is inconsistent, for where is the
consistent man? Consider, too, the objects of our knowledge: how
transitory are they, and how mean! How often they are in the
possession of the debauchee, of the harlot, of the robber!  Review
again the morals of your contemporaries: it is scarcely possible to
tolerate the best-mannered among them; not to say that a man can
scarcely tolerate himself. Amid such darkness and filth, in this
perpetual flux of substance, of time, of motion, and of things moved,
I can perceive nothing worthy of esteem or of desire. On the contrary,
we should comfort ourselves as we await our natural dissolution, and
not be vexed at the delay, but find rest in these thoughts: first,
that nothing can befall us which is not in accord with the nature of
all things; second, that it is always in our power not to do anything
against the divine spirit within us: to this no force can compel us.

11. To what end am I using my soul? Let me examine myself as to this
on all occasions, and consider what is passing now in that part of me
which men call the ruler of the rest. Let me think, too, whose is the
soul that I have. Is it a child's? Is it a youth's, a timorous
woman's, or a tyrant's; the soul of a tame beast or of a savage one?

12. Of what value the things are which the many account good you may
judge from this: If a man has conceived certain things, such as
prudence, temperance, justice, or courage, to be good in the real
sense, he cannot, while he is of this mind, readily listen to the
traditional gibe about a superabundance of good things. It will not
fit the case. But when he has in mind things which seem good in the
eyes of the multitude, he is perfectly willing to hear and accept as
quite appropriate the raillery of the comic poet. Thus even the
ordinary mind perceives the difference. For if this were not so, we
would not in the first case repudiate the jest as offensive, nor would
we salute it as a happy witticism when applied to wealth or to the
opulence which produces luxury and ostentation. Proceed then, and put
the question whether these things are to be valued and esteemed good
of which we have such an opinion that we may aptly say of their
possessor: "He has so many possessions about him that he has no place
wherein to ease himself."

13. I consist of a formal and a material element. Neither of these two
shall die and fade into nothingness, since neither came into being out
of nothing. Every part of me, then, will be transformed and ranged
again in some part of the Universe. That part of the Universe will
itself be transmuted into another part, and so on for all time
coming. By some such change as this I came into being, likewise my
progenitors, and so back from all time past. There is no objection to
this theory, even though the world be governed by determined cycles of
revolution.

14. Reason, and the art of thinking, are powers which are complete in
themselves, and in their special processes. They start from their own
internal principle, and proceed to their appointed end. Such mental
acts are called right, to indicate that the course of thought is right
or straight.

15. Nothing should be said to be part of a man which is not part of
his human nature. Things that are not part of his essence cannot be
required of him, and have no part in the promise or the fulfilment of
his nature. Therefore, in such things lies neither the end of man nor
the good which crowns that end. Moreover, if anything were really part
of a man, it would not be proper for him to despise it or revolt
against it, nor would he be praiseworthy who made himself independent
thereof. If non-essential things were indeed good, he could be no good
man who stinted himself in the use of them; but, as we see, the more a
man goes without them, and the more he endures the want of them, the
better a man he is.

16. The character of your most frequent impressions will be the
character of your mind. The soul takes colour from its impressions,
therefore steep it in such thoughts as these:--Wherever a man can
live, he can live well. A man can live in a court, therefore he can
live well there. Again everything works towards that for which it was
created, and that to which anything works is its end; and in the end
of everything is to be found the advantage and the good of it. Now,
for reasoning beings, Society is the highest good, for it has long
since been proved that we were brought into the world to be
social. Nay, was it not manifest that the inferior kinds were formed
for the superior, and the superior for each other? Now, the animate is
superior to the inanimate, and beings that reason to those that only
live.

17. To pursue impossibilities is madness; and it is impossible that
the wicked should not act in some such way as this.

18. Nothing can befall any man which he is not fitted by nature to
bear. The like events befall others, and either through ignorance that
the event has happened, or from ostentation of magnanimity, they stand
firm and unhurt by them. Strange then that ignorance or ostentation
should have more strength than wisdom!

19. Material things cannot touch the soul at all, nor have any access
to it: neither can they bend or move it. The soul is bent or moved by
itself alone, and remodels all things that present themselves from
without in accordance with whatever judgment it adopts within.

20. In one respect man is nearest and dearest to me; in so far, that
is, as I must do good to him and bear with him. But in so far as some
men obstruct me in my natural activities, man enters the class of
things indifferent to me, no less than the sun, the wind, or the wild
beast. By these indeed some special action may be impeded, but no
interference with my purpose or with my inward disposition can come
from them, thanks to my exceptive and modifying powers. For the mind
can convert and change everything that impedes its activity into
matter for its action; hindrance in its work becomes its real help,
and every obstruction makes for its progress.

21. Reverence that which is most excellent in the Universe, and the
most excellent is that which employs all things and rules
all. Likewise reverence that which is most excellent in yourself. It
is of the same nature as the former, for it is that which employs all
else that is in you, and that by which your whole life is ordered.

22. That which harms not the city cannot harm the citizen. Apply this
rule whenever you have the idea that you are hurt. If the state be not
hurt by this, neither am I harmed, and if the state be hurt we should
not be wrathful with him who hurt it. Consider where lay his
oversight.

23. Consider frequently how swiftly things that exist or are coming
into existence are swept by and carried away. Their substance is as a
river perpetually flowing; their actions are in continual change, and
their causes subject to ten thousand alterations. Scarcely anything is
stable, and the vast eternities of past and future in which all things
are swallowed up are close upon us on both hands. Is he not then a
fool who is puffed up with success in the things of this world, or is
distracted, or worried, as if he were in a time of trouble likely to
endure for long.

24. Keep in mind the universe of being in which your part is exceeding
small, the universe of time of which a brief and fleeting moment is
assigned to you; the destiny of things, and how infinitesimal your
share therein.

25. Does another wrong me? Let him look to that. His character and his
actions are his own. So much is in my present possession as is
dispensed to me by the nature of things, and I act as my own nature
now bids me.

26. Let the leading and ruling part of your soul stand unmoved by the
stirrings of the flesh, whether gentle or rude. Let it not commingle
with them, but keep itself apart, and confine these passions to their
proper bodily parts; and if they rise into the soul by any sympathy
with the body to which it is united, then we must not attempt to
resist the sensation, seeing that it is of our nature; but let not the
soul, for its part, add thereto the conception that the sensation is
good or bad.

27. Live with the Gods. And he lives with the Gods who continually
displays to them his soul, living in satisfaction with its lot, and
doing the will of the inward spirit, a portion of his own divinity
which Zeus has given to every man for a ruler and a guide. This is the
intelligence, the reason that abides in us all.

28. Are you angry with one whose armpits smell or whose breath is
foul?  What is the use? His mouth or his arm-pits are so, and the
consequence must follow. But, you say, man is a reasonable being, and
could by attention discern in what he offends. Very well, you too have
reason. Use your reason to move his; instruct, admonish him. If he
listens, you will cure him, and there will be no reason for anger. You
are neither actor nor harlot.

29. As you intend to live at your going, so you can live here. But, if
men do not permit you, then depart from life, yet so as if no
misfortune had befallen you. If my house be smoky, I go out, and where
is the great matter? So long as no such trouble drives me out, I
remain at my will, and no one will prevent me from acting as I
will. And my will is the will of a reasonable and social being.

30. The intelligence of the Universe is social. It has therefore made
the inferior orders for the sake of the superior; and has suited the
superior beings for one another. You see how it hath subordinated, and
co-ordinated, and distributed to each according to its merit, and
engaged the nobler beings to a mutual agreement and unanimity.

31. How have you behaved towards the Gods, towards your parents, your
brothers, your wife, your children, your teachers, those who reared
you, your friends, your intimates, your slaves? Can it be said that
you have ever acted towards all of them in the spirit of the line:--

      He wrought no harshness, spoke no unkind word?

Recollect all you have passed through, all that you have had strength
to bear. Your life is now a tale that is told, and your service is all
discharged. Recall the fair sights you have seen, the pleasures and
the pains you have despised, the so-called glory that you have
foregone, the unkindly men to whom you have shown kindness.

32. How is it that unskilled and ignorant souls disturb the skilful
and intelligent? What, I ask, is the skilful and intelligent soul? It
is that which knows the beginning and the end, and the reason which
pervades all being, and by determined cycles rules the Universe for
all time.

33. In a little space you will be only ashes and dry bones and a name,
perhaps not even that. A name is but so much empty sound and echo, and
the things which are so much prized in life are empty, mean, and
rotten. We are as puppies that snap at one another, as children that
quarrel, laugh, and presently weep again. But integrity, modesty,
justice, and truth,

      Up from the wide-wayed earth have soared to heaven.

What then should detain you here? Things sensible are ever changing
and unstable. The senses are dull and easily deceived. The poor soul
itself is a mere exhalation from blood. Fame in such a world is a
thing of naught. What then? You await calmly extinction or
transformation, whichever it may be. And till the fulness of the time
be come what is to suffice you? What else than a life spent in fearing
and praising the Gods, and in the practice of benevolence, toleration
and forbearance towards men? And whatsoever lies beyond the bounds of
flesh and breath, remember that it is neither yours nor in your power.

34. A prosperous life may be yours if only you can take the right
path, and keep to it in all you think or do. Two advantages are common
to Gods, to men, and to every rational soul. In the first place,
nothing external to themselves has power to hinder them. In the
second, their happiness lies in having mind and conduct disposed to
justice, and in the power to make that the end of all desire.

35. If the fault be not my sin, nor a consequence of it, if there be
no damage to the common good, why am I perturbed about it? Wherein is
the harm to the common good?

36. Be not incautiously carried away by sentiment, but aid him that
needs it according to your power and his desert. If his need be of the
things which are indifferent, think not that he is harmed thereby, for
so to think is an evil habit. But as, in the Comedy, the old man begs
to have his fosterchild's top for a keepsake, though he knows well
that it is a top and nothing more, so should you act also in the
affairs of life.

You mount the rostra and cry aloud, "O man, have you forgotten what is
the real value of what you seek?" "No, but the many are keen in their
pursuit of it." "Are you then to be a fool because they are?"

In whatever case I had been left I could have made my fortune: for
what is it to make a fortune but to confer good things upon one's
self; and true good things are a worthy frame of mind, worthy
impulses, worthy actions.

                        END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.

                               BOOK VI.

1. The substance of the Universe is docile and pliable. The mind which
governs it has in itself no source of evil-doing. It has no malice: it
does no ill, and nothing is hurt by it. By its guidance all things
come to be, and fulfil their being.

2. Act the part which is worthy of you, regarding not whether you be
stiff with cold or comfortably warm; whether you be drowsy or
refreshed with sleep; whether you be in good report or bad; whether
you be dying or upon some other business. For death also is one piece
of the business of life, and, here as elsewhere, it is enough to do
well what comes to our hand.

3. Look within. Let not the proper quality or value of anything escape
you.

4. All that exists will very speedily change; by rarefaction, if all
substance be one; otherwise by dispersion.

5. The guiding mind knows what its own condition is, how, and upon
what matter its work is done.

6. The best revenge is not to copy him that wronged you.

7. Find your sole delight and recreation in proceeding from one
unselfish action to another, with God ever in mind.

8. The ruling part of you is that which rouses and steers itself,
making itself what it wishes to be, and making all that happens take
such appearance as it will.

9. All things are accomplished according to the will of universal
nature. There is no other nature to influence them which either
comprehends the former from without, or is contained within it, or
exists externally, and independent of it.

10. The Universe is either a confusion ravelled and unravelled again,
or else a unity compact of order and forethought. If it be the former,
why should I wish to linger amid this aimless chaos and confusion, or
have any further care than "how to become earth again"? Nay, why am I
disturbed at all? Dissolution will overtake me, do what I please. But,
if the latter be the case, I adore the Ruler of all things, I stand
firm, and put my trust in him.

11. Whenever your situation forces trouble upon you, return quickly to
yourself, and interrupt the rhythm of life no longer than you are
compelled. Your grasp of the harmony will grow surer by continual
recurrence to it.

12. Had you at one time both a step-mother and a mother, you would
respect the former, yet you would be more constantly in your mother's
company. Your court and your philosophy are step-mother and mother to
you. Return then frequently to your true mother, and recreate yourself
with her. Her consolation can make the court seem bearable to you, and
you to it.

13. Keep these thoughts for meats and eatables: This that is before me
is the dead carcase of a fish, a fowl, a hog. This Falernian is but a
little grape juice. Think of your purple robes as sheep's wool stained
in the blood of a shell-fish. Such conceptions, which touch reality so
near, and set forth the sum and substance of these objects, are
powerful indeed to display to us their despicable value. In this
spirit we should act throughout life; and when things of great
apparent worth present themselves, we should strip them naked, view
their meanness, and cast aside the glowing description which makes
them seem so glorious. Vanity is a great sophist, and most imposes on
us when we believe ourselves to be busy about the noblest
ends. Remember the saying of Crates about Xenocrates himself.

14. Most objects of vulgar admiration may be referred to certain
general classes. There are, first, those which hold together by
cohesion or by some organic unity, such as stone, timber, figs, vines
or olives. The things which men, a shade more reasonable, admire are
referred to the class which possesses animal life such as is seen in
flocks and herds. When man's taste is still more cultured his
admiration turns to things which can show a rational intelligence. But
he admires this intelligence not as a universal principle, but only so
far as he finds it expressed in art or industry, or, indeed, sometimes
merely so far as it is exhibited by his retinue of artist slaves. But
he who values rational intelligence as a universal thing, and as a
social force, will care nothing for these other objects of
admiration. He will, above all things, strive to preserve his own mind
in all its rational and social instincts and activities; and to this
end he will co-operate with any of his kind.

15. Some things hasten into being. Some hasten to be no more. Even as
a thing is born some part of it is already dead. Flux and change are
constantly renewing the world, just as the unbroken flow of time ever
presents to us some new portion of eternity. In this vast river, on
whose bosom there is no tarrying, what is there among the things that
sweep by us that is worth the prizing? It is as if a man grew fond of
one among a passing flight of sparrows, when already it had vanished
from his sight. Our life itself is much like a vapour of the blood or
a drawing in of air. Our momentary actions of inhalation and
exhalation are one in kind with that whole power of breathing which,
yesterday or the day before, we received at birth, and which we must
restore again to the source from whence we drew it.

16. It is a small privilege to transpire like plants, or even to
breathe as cattle or wild beasts do. To feel the impressions of sense,
to be swayed like puppets by passion, to herd together and to live by
bread; all this is no great thing. There is nothing here superior to
our power of discharging our superfluous food. What, then, is of
value? To be received with clapping of hands? No. Neither, therefore,
is the applause of tongues more valuable, for the praises of the
multitude are naught but the idle clapping of tongues. Dismiss the
vanity called fame, and what remains to be prized? This, I think: in
all things to act, or to restrain yourself from action, as best suits
the particular structure of your nature. This is the end of all arts
and studies, for every art aims at making what it produces well
adapted to the work for which it was designed. The gardener, the
vine-dresser, the horse-breaker, the dog-trainer all try for this; and
what else is the aim of all education and teaching? Here, then, is
what you may truly value: this well won, you will seek for nothing
more. Will you, then, cease valuing the multitude of other things? If
you do not, you will never attain to freedom, self-sufficiency, or
tranquillity. You cannot escape envying, suspecting, and striving
against those who have the power to deprive you of your cherished
objects, nor plotting against men who are in possession of that on
which you set your heart. The man who lacks any of these things must,
of necessity, be distracted, and be for ever complaining against the
Gods. But reverence and respect for your own intelligence will bring
you to agreement with yourself, into concord with mankind, and into
harmony with the Gods, whom you will praise for all their good gifts
and guidance.

17. Upward, downward, round and round run the courses of the
elements. But the course of virtue is like none of these; it follows a
diviner path, well-directed in a way that is hard for us to
understand.

18. Strange are the ways of men! They can speak no good word of the
contemporaries with whom they live; yet they count it a great thing to
gain the praises of a posterity whom they never saw nor shall see. As
well might we grieve because we cannot hear the praises of our
ancestors.

19. If a thing seems to you very difficult to accomplish, conclude not
that it is beyond human power. But, if you see that anything is within
man's power, and part of his proper work, conclude that you also may
attain to it.

20. In the gymnasium, if some one scratches us with his nails, or in a
sudden onset bruises our head, we express no resentment; we are not
offended; nor do we suspect him for the future as one who is plotting
against us. We are on our guard against him, it is true, but not as
against an enemy or a suspected person. In all good humour we simply
keep out of his way. Let us thus behave in other affairs of life, and
overlook the many injuries which are done to us, as it were, by our
antagonists in the gymnasium of the world. As I said, we may keep out
of their way, but without suspicion or hatred.

21. If any one can convince or shew me that I am wrong in thought or
deed, I will gladly change. It is truth that I seek; and truth never
yet hurt any man. What does hurt is persistence in error or in
ignorance.

22. I do my duty, and for the rest am not distracted by anything which
is inanimate or irrational, or which has lost or ignores the proper
way.

23. Use the brute creation, and also all material things, in the
spirit of magnanimity and freedom which becomes him who has reason in
using that which has it not. Towards men, who have reason, act in a
social spirit. In every business call the Gods to aid thee, nor
trouble how long this business shall endure; three hours spent therein
may suffice you.

24. Alexander of Macedon and his muleteer, when they died, were in a
like condition. They were either alike resumed into the seminal source
of all things, or alike dispersed among the atoms.

25. Consider all the many things, both physical and spiritual, that
are adoing within each of us at the very same instant of time; and you
will wonder the less at the far greater multitudes of things, even all
that is, which exist together in the one-and-all which we call the
Universe.

26. Should some one ask you how the name Antoninus is written, would
you not carefully pronounce to him each one of the letters? Should he
then begin an angry dispute about it, would you also grow angry, and
not rather mildly count over the several letters to him? Thus in life
remember that each duty is made up of a number of elements. We should
observe all these calmly; and, without anger at those who are angry
with us, we should set about accomplishing the task which lies before
us.

27. Is it not cruel to restrain men from pursuing what appears to be
their own advantage? And yet, in a manner, you deny them this liberty
when you shew anger at their errors. Men are assuredly attracted to
what seems to be their own advantage. "Yes," you say, "but it is not
their advantage." Instruct them, then, and make this evident to them,
but without anger.

28. Death is the cessation of the sensual impressions, of the impulses
of the passions, of the questionings of reason, and of the servitude
to the flesh.

29. It is shame and dishonour that, in any man's life, the soul should
faint from its duty while the body still holds out.

30. See to it that you fall not into Caesarism: avoid that stain, for
it may come to you. Guard your simplicity, your goodness, your
sincerity, your dignity, your reticence, your love of justice, your
piety, your kindliness, your affection for your kin, and your
constancy to your duty. Endeavour earnestly to continue such as
philosophy would make you. Reverence the Gods, and help mankind. Life
is short, and the one fruit of it in this world is a pure mind and
unselfish conduct. Be in all things the disciple of Antonine. Imitate
his resolute constancy to rational action, his level equability, his
godliness, his serenity of countenance, his sweetness of temper, his
contempt of vainglory, his keen attempts to comprehend things. Remember
how he never quitted any subject till he had thoroughly examined it
and understood it, and how he bore with those who blamed him unjustly,
without making any angry retort: how he was never in a hurry; how he
discouraged calumny; how closely he scanned the manners and actions of
men; how cautious he was in reproaching any man; how free from fear,
suspicion, or sophistry; how little contented him in the matter of
house, furniture, dress, food, servants; how patient he was of labour,
and how slow to anger. So abstemious was his life that he could hold
out until evening without relieving himself, except at the usual
hour. What a firm and loyal friend he was; how patient of frank
opposition to his opinions; how glad if any one could set him right!
How religious he was, and yet how free from superstition! Follow in
his steps that your last hour may find you with a conscience as easy
as his.

31. Sober yourself, recall your senses. Shake sleep from you, and know
that it was a dream that troubled you; and, now that you are broad
awake again, regard the waking world as you did the dream.

32. I am made up of a frail body and a soul. To the body all things
are indifferent, because it cannot distinguish them; and to the mind
all things are indifferent also which arise not from its own
activities. All these are indeed in its own power, but it is concerned
with only such of them as are present. Its past and future activities
are indifferent to it now.

33. No toil for hand or foot is against Nature, so long as it is
proper for hand or foot to do. No more, then, is toil contrary to the
nature of man, as man, so long as he is doing work appointed for man
to do; and if it be not contrary to his nature it cannot be evil for
him.

34. How many are the pleasures that have been enjoyed by robbers,
rakes, parricides, and tyrants!

35. Do you not see how common artificers, though they may humour the
public to a certain extent, cling to the rules of their art, and
cannot endure to depart from them? Is it not grievous, then, that the
architect and the physician should shew greater respect for the rules
of their several professions, than man shews for his own reason, which
he possesses in common with the Gods?

36. Asia and Europe are mere corners of the Universe: the whole sea is
but a drop, Athos a clod. All the present is but an instant in
eternity. All things are small, changeable, and fleeting. Everything
proceeds from the universal intelligence, either directly or as a
consequence. Thus, the jaws of lions, poisons, all evil things such as
thorns or mire, are the consequences of the grand and the
beautiful. Do not, then, imagine that they are foreign to that which
you revere, but consider well the source of all things.

37. He who has seen the present has seen all that either has been from
all eternity, or will be to all eternity, for all things are alike in
kind and form.

38. Consider frequently the connexion of all things in the Universe,
and their relation to each other. All things are in a manner
intermingled with one another, and are, therefore, mutually
friendly. For one thing comes in due order after another, by virtue of
local movements, and of the harmony and unity of the whole.

39. Adapt yourself to the things which your destiny has given you:
love those with whom it is your lot to live, and love them with
sincere affection.

40. A tool, an instrument, a utensil, is in good case when it is fit
for its proper work: yet its maker remains not by it. But within the
organisms of Nature there remains and resides the power which made
them. You ought, therefore, to reverence this power the more,
believing that if you act in deference to its will, all will happen to
you in reason; for so in reason the Universe ranges all.

41. Whenever we imagine that anything which lies not in our power is
good or evil for us, if the evil befall us or if we miss the good, we
inevitably blame the Gods, and hate the men who are, or whom we
suspect to be, the cause of our disaster or our loss. Our solicitude
about such things leads to much injustice; but if we judge only the
things that are in our power to be good or evil, there is no reason
left for accusing the Gods or for hating men.

42. We are all co-operating in one great work, some with knowledge and
understanding, others ignorantly and without design. It is in this
sense, I think, that Heraclitus says that men are working even while
they sleep, working together in all that is being done in the
Universe. Each works in a different way; and even those contribute
abundantly who murmur and try to oppose and to frustrate the course of
nature. The world has need even of such as these. It remains then for
you to make sure which is the class in which you rank yourself. The
presiding mind will assuredly use you to good purpose one way or
other; and will enlist you among its labourers and fellow-workers. But
see to it that the part that falls to you lie not in the vulgar comic
passage of the play, of which Chrysippus has spoken.

43. Does the sun pretend to perform the work of the rain, or
Aesculapius that of Ceres? What of the several stars? Are they not
different, yet all jointly working for the same end?

44. If the Gods took counsel about me and what should befall me,
doubtless then-counsel was good. It is difficult to imagine Gods
wanting in forethought, and what could move them to do me wilful harm?
What advantage would thence accrue, either to themselves or to the
Universe which is their special care? If they have not taken counsel
about me in particular, they certainly have done so about the common
interest of the Universe, and I therefore should accept cheerfully and
contentedly the fate which is the outcome of their ordinance. If,
indeed, they take no counsel about anything (which it were impious to
believe), then let us quit our sacrifices, our prayers, and our oaths,
and all acts of devotion which we now perform as if they lived and
moved amongst us. But, granting that the Gods take no thought for my
affairs, I may still deliberate about myself. It is my business to
consider my own interest. Now, each man's interest is that which
agrees with the structure of his nature, and my nature is rational and
social. As Antoninus, my city and my country is Rome; as a human being
it is the world. That alone, then, which profits these two cities can
profit me.

45. All that happens to the individual is of profit to the whole. This
would suffice. But if you consider closely you will see that it is
also a general truth that all that happens to one man is of profit to
the rest of mankind. "Profit" here should be taken in a somewhat
general sense, as referring to things indifferent.

46. In the amphitheatre and other such resorts the same or similar
spectacles, continually presented, cloy at last. It is even so in all
our experience of life. All things, first and last, are alike, and
like derived. When shall the end be?

47. Think continually of all the men that are dead and gone, men of
every sort and condition, of all manner of pursuits, and of every
nation. Return back to Philistion, Phoebus, and Origanion. Pass down
to other generations of the dead. We must all change our habitation
and go to that place whither so many great orators, so many venerable
philosophers, Heraclitus, Pythagoras, Socrates, and so many heroes
have gone before, and so many generals and princes have followed. Add
to these Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes, and other keen, great,
laborious, cunning and arrogant spirits; yea, such as have wittily
derided this fading mortal life which is but for a day, as did
Menippus and his brethren. Consider that all these are long since in
their graves. And wherein here is the harm for them; or even for men
whose names are not remembered? The one precious thing in life is to
spend it in a steady course of truth and justice, with kindliness even
for the false and the unjust.

48. When you would cheer your heart, consider the several excellencies
of those that live around you. Consider the activity of one, the
modesty of another, the generosity of a third, and the other virtues
of the rest. Nothing rejoices the heart so much as instances, the more
the better, of goodness manifested in the characters of those around
us. Let us, therefore, have such instances ever present for
reflection.

49. Are you grieved that you weigh only these few pounds, and not
three hundred? If not, is there greater reason to sorrow if you live
only so many years and no longer? You are satisfied with your allotted
quantity of matter; content yourself then likewise with the span of
time appointed you.

50. Try to persuade men to agree with you; but whether they agree or
not, pursue the course you have marked out when the principles of
justice point that way. Should one oppose you by force, act with
resignation, and shew not that you are hurt, use the obstruction for
the exercise of some other virtue, and remember that your purpose
involved the reservation that you were not to aim at impossibilities.
What, after all, was your aim? To make some good effort such as
this. Well, then, you have succeeded, even though your first purpose
be not accomplished.

51. The vain-glorious man places his happiness in the action of
others. The sensualist finds it in his own sensations. The wise man
realizes it in his own work.

52. You have it in your power to form no opinion about this or that,
and so to have peace of mind. Things material have no power to form
our opinions for us.

53. Accustom yourself to attend closely to what is said by others, and
as far as possible to penetrate into the mind of the speaker.

54. What profits not the swarm profits not the bee.

55. If the sailors revile their pilot, or the sick their physician,
whom will they follow or obey? And how will the one secure safety to
the crew, or the other health to the patients?

56. How many who entered the world with me are already departed!

57. To the jaundiced, honey seems bitter; and water is a thing of
dread to those bitten by mad dogs. To boys a ball is a glorious
thing. Why, then, am I angry? Has error in the mind less power than a
little bile in the jaundiced, or a little poison in him who is bitten?

58. No man can prevent you from living according to the plan of your
nature; and nothing can befall you which is contrary to the plan of
the nature of the Universe.

59. Consider what men are; whom they seek to please; what they expect
to gain, and how they go about to compass their ends. Think how soon
eternity will shroud all things, and how much is already shrouded.

                        END OF THE SIXTH BOOK.

                              BOOK VII.

1. What is vice? It is what you have often seen. In every instance of
it keep in mind that you have often seen the like before. Search up
and down; you will find sameness everywhere. Among the events which
fill the history of ancient, middle, and present ages; among the
things of which our cities and our households are full to-day, nothing
is new, all is familiar and fleeting.

2. How can the great principles of life become dead if the impressions
which correspond to them be not extinguished? These impressions you
may still rekindle. I can always form the proper opinion of this or
that; and, if so, why am I disturbed? What is external to my mind is
of no consequence to it. Learn this, and you stand upright; you can
always renew your life. See things again as once you saw them, and
your life is made new again.

3. Your vain concern for shows, for stage plays, for flocks and herds,
your little combats, are as bones cast for the contention of puppies,
as baits dropped into a fishpond, as the toil of ants and the burdens
that they bear, as the scampering of frightened mice, or the antics of
puppets jerked by wires. It is then your duty amid all this to stand
firm, kindly and not proud, yet to understand that a man's worth is
just the worth of that which he pursues.

4. In conversation we should give good heed to what is said, and in
every enterprise we should attend to what is done. In the latter case,
at once look to the end in view, and, in the former, note the meaning
intended.

5. Is my understanding sufficient for this business or not? If it be
sufficient, I use it for the work in hand as an instrument given to me
by nature. If it be not sufficient, I either give place to one better
fitted for the achievement, or, if for some reason this be not a
proper course, I do it as best I can, taking the aid of those who, by
directing my mind, can accomplish something fit and serviceable for
the common good. For all that I do, whether by myself or with the help
of others, should be directed solely towards what is fit and useful
for the public service.

6. How many of those who were once so mightily acclaimed are delivered
up to oblivion! And how many of those who acclaimed them are dead and
gone this many a day!

7. Be not ashamed of taking assistance. It is laid upon you to do your
part, as on a soldier when the wall is stormed. What, then, if you are
lame, and cannot scale the battlements alone, but can with another's
help?

8. Be not troubled about the future. You will come to it, if need be,
with the same power to reason, as you use upon your present business.

9. All things are twined together, in one sacred bond. Scarce is there
one thing quite foreign to another. They are all ranged together, and
leagued to form the same ordered whole. The Universe, compact of all
things, is one; through all things runs one divinity; being is one;
and law, which is the reason common to all intelligent creatures; and
truth is one as well, that is if there be but one sort of perfection
possible to all beings which are of the same nature and partake of the
same rational power.

10. Everything material is soon engulfed in the matter of the whole,
and every active cause is swiftly resumed into the Universal
reason. The memory of all things is quickly buried in eternity.

11. In the reasoning being to act according to nature is to act
according to reason.

12. Be upright either by nature or by correction.

13. In an organic unity bodily members play the same part as reasoning
beings among separate existences, since both are fitted for one joint
operation. This thought will come home to you the more vividly if you
say often to yourself: "I am a member of the mighty organism which is
made up of reasoning beings." If, instead of a member, you say that
you are merely a part, you have not as yet attained to a heartfelt
love of mankind. As yet you love not well-doing for its own sake
alone, and you still perform your bare duty, with no thought that you
are your own benefactor by the deed.

14. From the world without let what will affect whatever parts are
subject to such affection. Let the part which suffers complain, if it
will, of the suffering. But I, if I admit not that the hap is evil,
remain uninjured. Not to admit it is surely in my power.

15. Let any one say or do what he pleases, I must be a good man. It is
just as gold, or emeralds, or purple might say continually: "Let men
do or say what they please, I must be an emerald, and retain my
lustre."

16. The soul which rules you vexes not itself. It does not, for
example, awake its own fears or arouse its own desires. If another can
raise grief or terror in it, let him do so. By its own impressions it
will not be led into such emotions.

Let the body take thought, if it can, for itself, lest it suffer
anything, and complain when it suffers. The soul, by means of which we
experience fear and sorrow, and by means of which, indeed, we receive
any impression of these, will admit no suffering. You cannot force it
to any such opinion.

The ruling part is, in itself, free from all dependence, unless it
makes itself dependent. Similarly, it may be free from all disturbance
and obstruction, if it does not disturb and obstruct itself.

17. To have good fortune is to have a good spirit, or a good
mind. What do you here, Imagination? Be gone, I say, even as you
came. I have no need for you. You came, you say, after your ancient
fashion: I am not angry with you, only, be gone!

18. Do you dread change? What can come without it? What can be pleasanter
or more proper to universal nature? Can you heat your bath unless wood
undergoes a change? Can you be fed unless a change is wrought upon
your food? Can any useful thing be done without changes? Do you not
see, then, that this change also which is working in you is even such
as these, and alike necessary to the nature of the Universe?

19. Through the substance of the Universe, as through a torrent, all
bodies are borne. They are all of the same nature, and fellow-workers
with the whole, even as our several members are fellow-workers with
one another. How many a Chrysippus, how many a Socrates, how many an
Epictetus hath the course of ages swallowed up! Let this thought be
with you about every man, and upon all occasions.

20. For this alone I am concerned; that I do nothing that suits not
the nature of man, nothing as man's nature would not have it, nothing
that it wishes not yet.

21. The time is at hand when you shall forget all things, and when all
shall forget you.

22. It is man's special business to love even those who err; and to
this love you attain, if it is borne in upon you that even these
sinners are your kin, and that they offend through ignorance and
against their will. Remember also that in a little while both you and
they must die: remember before all things that they have not harmed
you, for they have not made your soul worse than it was before.

23. Presiding nature from the universal substance, as from wax, now
forms a horse, now breaks it up again, making of its matter a tree,
afterwards a man, and again something different. Each of these shapes
subsists but for a little. Yet there is nothing dreadful for the chest
in being taken to pieces, any more than there formerly was in being
put together.

24. A wrathful look is completely against nature. When the countenance
is often thus deformed, its beauty dies, in the end is quenched for
ever, and cannot be revived again. Seek to comprehend from this very
fact that it is against reason. And if the sense of moral evil be gone
as well, why should a man wish to remain alive?

25. In a little space Nature, the supreme and universal ruler, will
change all things that you behold; out of their substance she will
make other things, and others again out of the substance of these, so
that the Universe may be ever new.

26. Whenever someone offends you, consider straightway how he has
erred in his conceptions of good or evil. When you see where his error
lies you will pity him, and be neither surprised nor angry. Indeed you
yourself perhaps still wrongly count good the same things as he does,
or things just like them. Your duty then is to forgive. And, if you
cease from these false ideas of good and bad, you will find it the
easier to grant indulgence to him who is still mistaken.

27. Dwell not on what you lack so much as on what you have
already. Select the best of what you have, and consider how
passionately you would have longed for it had it not been yours. Yet
be watchful, lest by this joy in what you have you accustom yourself
to value it too highly; so that, if it should fail, you would be
distressed.

28. Retire within yourself. The reasoning power that rules you
naturally finds contentment with itself in just dealing, and in the
calm which such dealing brings.

29. Blot out imagination. Check the brutal impulses of the
passions. Confine your energies to the present time. Observe clearly
all that happens either to yourself or to another. Divide and analyse
all objects into cause and matter. Take thought for your last
hour. Let another's sin remain where the guilt lies.

30. Apply your mind to what is said. Penetrate all happenings and the
causes thereof.

31. Rejoice yourself with simplicity, modesty, and indifference to all
things that lie between good and bad. Love mankind, and obey God. "All
things," says someone, "go by law and order." But what if there be
naught beyond the atoms? Even if that be so, suffice it to remember
that all things, save very few, are swayed by law.

32. Concerning death: If the Universe be a concourse of atoms, death
is a scattering of these; if it be an ordered unity, death is an
extinction or a translation to another state.

33. Concerning pain: Pain which cannot be borne brings us
deliverance. Pain that lasts musts needs be bearable. The mind can
abstract itself from the body, and the soul takes no hurt. As to the
parts which suffer by pain, let them, if they can, make their own
protest.

34. Concerning glory: Consider the understanding of men, what they
shun, and what they pursue. And reflect that, as heaps of sand are
driven one upon another, and the later drifts bury and hide those that
went before, so, too, in life the former ages are soon buried by the
next.

35. This from Plato: "'To the man who has true grandeur of mind, and
who contemplates all time and all being, can human life appear a great
matter? 'Impossible,' says the other. 'Can then such a one count death
a thing of dread?' 'No, indeed.'"

36. It is a saying of Antisthenes, that it is the part of a king to do
good and reap reproach.

37. It is a shameful thing that the countenance should obey the mind,
should compose and order itself as the mind bids it, while the mind
cannot compose and order itself as it wills.

38. Vain is all anger at external things
    For they regard it nothing.--

39. Give joy to us and to the immortal Gods.

40. For life is, like the laden ear, cut down;
    And some must fall and some unreaped remain.

41. Me and my children, if the Gods neglect,
    It is for some good reason.

42. For I keep right and justice on my side.

43. Weep not with them, and still these throbs of woe.

44. From Plato:--"I would make him this just answer, 'You are
mistaken, my friend, to think that a man of any worth should count the
chances of living and dying. Should he not rather, in all he does,
consider simply whether he is acting justly or unjustly, whether he is
playing the part of a good man or a bad?'"

45. He says again:--"In truth, Athenians, the matter stands thus:
Wheresoever a man has chosen his stand, judging it the fittest for
him, or wheresoever he is stationed by his commander, there, I think,
he should stay at all hazards, making no account of death, or any
other evil but dishonour."

46. Again:--"Consider, my friend, whether the truly noble and the
truly good be not something quite apart from saving and being
saved. The man who is a man indeed should not set his heart on living
through a few more years of life, nor should he make that the end of
his desire. Rather he should commit the matter to the will of God;
assenting to the maxim which even women use, that 'no man can elude
his destiny,' and studying in addition how he may spend the life that
remains to him for the best."

47. Contemplate the courses of the stars, as one should do that
revolves along with them. Consider also without ceasing the changes of
elements, one into another. Speculations upon such things cleanse away
the filth of this earthly life.

48. It is a good thought of Plato's, that when we discourse of men we
should "look down, as from a high place," on all things earthly; on
herds and armies; on husbandry and marriage; on partings, births, and
deaths; on the tumults of the courts of justice; on the desert places
of the earth; on the varied spectacle of savage nations; on feasting
and lamentation; on traffic; on the medley of all things, and the
order which emerges from their contrariety.

49. Consider the past, and the revolutions of so many Empires; and
thence you may foresee what shall happen hereafter. It will be ever
the same in all things; nor can events leave the rhythm in which they
are now moving. Wherefore it is much the same to view human life for
forty, as for a myriad of years. What more is there to see?

50. To earth returns whatever sprang from earth,
    But what's of heavenly seed remounts to heaven.

This imports either the loosing of a knot of atoms, or a similar
dispersion of immutable elements.

51. By meats and drinks, and charms and magic arts
    Death's course they would divert, and thus escape.
    .  .  .  .  .  .  .
    The gale that blows from God we must endure,
    Toiling, but not repining.....

52. He is a better wrestler than you, but not more public-spirited,
more modest, or better prepared for the accidents of fate; not more
gentle toward the short-comings of his neighbours.

53. Wherever we can act conformably to the reason which is common to
Gods and men, there we have nothing to dread. Where we can profit by
prosperous activity which proceeds in agreement with the constitution
of our nature, we need suspect no harm.

54. In all places, and at all times you may devoutly accept your
present fortune, and deal in justice with your present company. You
may take pains to understand all arising imaginations, that none may
steal upon you before you comprehend them.

55. Pry not into the souls of others; but rather look straight to the
goal whither nature is leading you; whither the nature of the Universe
by external events, and whither your own nature by the tendency of
your own action. Each being must perform the part for which it was
created. Now all other beings are created for the sake of those among
them which have reason; as all lower things exist for the sake of
things superior to them; and reasoning beings were created for one
another. The leading principle in man's nature, then, is the social
spirit; and the second is victory over the solicitations of the
body. For it is proper to the workings of reason to set bounds to
themselves, and never to be overpowered by the calls of sense or by
the stirrings of passion, both of which are animal in their
nature. The intellect claims to reign over these, and never to be
subjected to them; and rightly, because it is equipped to command and
use all the lower powers. The third element in the constitution of a
reasoning being is caution against rashness and error. Let the soul go
forth straight upon her way in the possession of these principles, and
she stands seized of her full estate.

56. Consider yourself as dead, your life as finished and past. Live
what yet remains according to Nature's laws, as an overplus granted to
you beyond your hope.

57. Love that only which is your hap, which comes upon you as your
part in Fate's great spinning. What, indeed, can fit you better?

58. Upon every accident keep in view those to whom the like has
happened. They stormed at the event, wondered and complained. But now
where are they? They are gone for ever. Why should you act the like
part? Leave these unnatural commotions to fickle men who change and
are changed. Yourself take thought how you may make good use of such
events. Good use for them there is; they will make matter for good
actions. Let it be your sole effort and desire to gain your own
approval in every action; and remember that the material objects of
both that effort and of that desire are things indifferent.

59. Look inward. Within is the fountain of Good. Dig constantly and it
will ever well forth.

60. Keep the body steady, without irregularity, whether in its motions
or in its postures. For, as the soul shews itself in the countenance
by a wise and graceful air, it should require the same expressive
power of the whole body. But all this must be practised without
affectation.

61. The art of Life is more like that of the wrestler than of the
dancer; for the wrestler must always be ready on his guard, and stand
firm against the sudden, unforeseen efforts of his adversary.

62. Consider constantly what manner of men they are whose approbation
you desire, and what may be the character of their souls. Then you
will neither accuse such as err unwillingly, nor need their
commendation when you look into the springs of their opinions and
their desires.

63. "Every soul," says Plato, "parts unwillingly with truth." You may
say the same of justice, temperance, good-nature, and every virtue. It
is most necessary to keep this ever in mind; for, if you do, you will
be more kindly towards all men.

64. In all pain keep in mind that there is no baseness in it, that it
cannot harm the soul which guides you, nor destroy that soul as a
reasoning or as a social force. In most pain you may find help in the
saying of Epicurus, that "pain is neither unbearable nor everlasting,
if you bear in mind its narrow limits, and allow no additions from
your imagination." Remember also that we are fretted, though we see it
not, by many things which are of the same nature as pain, things such
as drowsiness, excessive heat, want of appetite. When any of these
things annoy you, say to yourself that you are giving in to pain.

65. Look to it that you feel not towards the most inhuman of mankind,
as they feel towards their fellows.

66. Whence do we conclude that Telauges had not a brighter genius than
Socrates? 'Tis not enough that Socrates died more gloriously or argued
more acutely with the sophists; or that he kept watch more patiently
through a frosty night; or because, when ordered to arrest the
innocent Salaminian, he judged it more noble to disobey; or because of
any stately airs and graces he assumed in public, in which we may very
justly refuse to believe. But, assuming all this true, when we
consider Socrates, we must ask what manner of soul he had. Could he
find contentment in acting with justice towards men, and with piety
towards the Gods, neither vainly provoked by the vices of others, nor
servilely flattering them in their ignorance; counting nothing strange
that the Ruler of the Universe appointed, not sinking under anything
as intolerable, and never yielding up his soul in surrender to the
passions of the flesh.

67. Nature has not so blended the soul with the body that it cannot
fix its own bounds, and execute its own office by itself. It is very
possible to be a God among men, and yet be recognised by
none. Remember that always, and this as well, that the happiness of
life lies in very few things. And though you despair of becoming great
in Logic or in Science, you need not despair of becoming a free man,
full of modesty and unselfishness, and of obedience unto God.

68. It is in your power to live superior to all violence, and in the
greatest calm of mind, were all men to rail against you as they
pleased; and though wild beasts were to tear asunder the wretched
members of this fleshly mass which has grown with your growth. What is
to hinder the soul amid all this from preserving itself in all
tranquillity, in just judgments about surrounding things, and in ready
use of whatever is cast in its way? Judgment may say to accident:--
"Your real nature is this or that, though you appear otherwise in the
eyes of men." Use may say to circumstance:--"I was looking for
you. To me all that is present is ever matter for rational and social
virtue, in sum, for that art which is proper both to man and God. All
that befalls is fit and familiar for the purposes of God or
man. Nothing is either new or intractable, but everything is well
known and fit to work upon."

69. It is the perfection of morals to spend each day as if it were the
last of life, without excitement, without sloth, and without
hypocrisy.

70. The Gods, who are immortal, are not vexed that in a long eternity
they must ever bear with the wickedness and the multitude of
sinners. Nay, they even lavish on them all manner of loving care. But
you, who are presently to cease from being, can, forsooth, endure no
more, though you are one of the sinners yourself!

71. It is ridiculous that you flee not from the vice that is in
yourself, as you have it in your power to do; but are still striving
to flee from the vice in others, which you can never do.

72. Whatever the rational and social faculty finds fit neither for
rational nor for social ends, it justly ranks as inferior to itself.

73. When you have done a kind action, another has benefited. Why do
you, like the fools, require some third thing in addition--a
reputation for benevolence or a return for it.

74. No man wearies of what brings him gain, and your gain lies in
acting according to nature. Be not weary, therefore, of gaining by the
act which gives others gain.

75. Nature set about making an ordered universe; and now, either all
that is follows a law of necessary consequence and connexion, or we
must admit that there is least rationality in the things which are
most excellent, and which appear to be most special objects for the
impulses of the universal mind. Remembrance of this will give you
calmness on many an occasion.

                       END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.

                              BOOK VIII.

1. For repressing vain glory, it serves to remember that it is no
longer in your power to make your whole life, even from your youth
onwards, a life worthy of a philosopher. It is known to many, and you
yourself know also, how far you are from wisdom. Confusion is upon
you, and it now can be no easy matter for you to gain the reputation
of a philosopher. The conditions of your life are against it. Now
therefore, as you see how the matter truly lies, put from you all
thoughts of reputation among men; and let it suffice you to live so
long as your nature wills, though that be but the scanty remnant of a
life. Study, therefore, the will of your nature, and be solicitous
about nothing else. You have made many efforts and wandered much, but
you have nowhere found happiness; not in syllogisms, not in riches,
not in fame or pleasure, not in anything. Where, then, is it? In
acting that part which human nature requires. How can you act that
part? By holding principles as the source of your desires and
actions. What principles? The principles of good and evil: That
nothing is good for a man which does not make him just, temperate,
courageous, and free; and that nothing can be evil which tends not to
make him the contrary of all these.

2. Upon every action ask yourself, what is the effect of this for me?
Shall I never repent of it? I shall presently be dead, and all these
things gone. What more should I desire if my present action is
becoming to an intelligent and a social being, subject to the same law
with Gods?

3. Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, what were they compared with Diogenes,
Heraclitus, Socrates? These knew the nature of things, their causes
and their matter, and the minds within them were at one. As to the
former, how many things they schemed for, and to how many were they
enslaved!

4. Men will go their ways none the less, though you burst in protest.

5. Before all things, be not perturbed. Everything comes to pass as
directed by universal Nature, and in a little time you will be
departed and gone, like Hadrianus and Augustus. Then, scan closely the
nature of what has befallen, remembering that it is your duty to be a
good man. Do unflinchingly whatever man's nature requires, and speak
as seems most just, yet in kindliness, modesty, and sincerity.

6. It is Nature's work to transfer what is now here into another
place, to change things, to carry them hence, and set them
elsewhere. All is change, yet is there no need to fear innovation, for
all obey the laws of custom, and in equal measure all things are
apportioned.

7. For every nature it is sufficient that it goes on its way, and
prospers. The rational nature prospers while it assents to no false or
uncertain opinion, while it directs its impulses to unselfish ends
alone, while it aims its desires and aversions only at the things
within its power, and while it welcomes with contentment all that
universal Nature ordains. The nature of each of us is part of
universal Nature, as the leaf is part of the tree; the leaf, indeed,
is part of an insensible and unreasoning system which can be
obstructed in its workings; but human nature is part of that universal
system which cannot be impeded, and which is intelligent and
just. Hence is meted out, suitably to all, our proper portions of
time, of matter, of active principle, of powers, and of events. Yet
look not to find that each several thing corresponds exactly with any
other. Consider rather the whole nature and circumstances of the one,
and compare them with the whole of the other.

8. You lack leisure for reading; but leisure to repress all insolence
you do not lack. You have leisure to keep yourself superior to
pleasure and pain and vain glory, to restrain all anger against the
ungrateful, nay, even to lavish loving care upon them.

9. Let no man any more hear you railing on the life of the court; nay,
revile it not to your own hearing.

10. Repentance is a self-reproving, because we have neglected
something useful. Whatever is good must be useful in some sort, and
worthy of the care of a good and honourable man. Now, such a man could
never repent of neglecting some opportunity of pleasure. Pleasure,
then, is neither useful nor good.

11. Of each thing ask: What is this in itself and by its constitution?
What is its substance or matter? What is its cause? What is its
business in the Universe? How long shall it endure?

12. When you are reluctant to be roused from sleep, remember that it
accords with your constitution and with human nature to perform social
actions. Sleep is common to us with the brutes. Now, whatever accords
with the nature of each species must be most proper, most fitting, and
most delightful to it.

13. Constantly, and, if possible, on every occasion, apply to your
imaginations the methods of Physics, Ethics, and Dialectic.

14. Whomsoever you meet, say straightway to yourself:--What are this
man's principles of good and evil? For if he holds this or that
doctrine concerning pleasure and pain, and the causes thereof,
concerning glory and infamy, death and life, it will seem to me
neither strange nor wondrous that this or that should be his
conduct. I shall bear in mind that he has no choice but to act so.

15. Remember that, as 'tis folly to be surprised that a fig-tree bears
figs, so is it equal folly to be surprised that the Universe produces
those things of which it was ever fruitful. It is folly in a physician
to be surprised that a man has fallen into a fever; or in a pilot that
the wind has turned against him.

16. Remember that to change your course, and to follow any man who can
set you right is no compromise of your freedom. The act is your own,
performed on your own impulse and judgment, and according to your own
understanding.

17. If the doing of this be in your own power, why do it thus? If it
be in another's, whom do you accuse? The atoms or the Gods? To accuse
either is a piece of madness. Therefore accuse no one. Set right, if
you can, the cause of error; if you cannot, correct the result at
least. If even that be impossible, what purpose can your accusations
serve?  Nothing should be done without a purpose.

18. That which dies falls not out of the Universe. If then it stays
here, here too it suffers a change, and is resolved into those
elements of which the world, and you too, consist. These also are
changed, and murmur not.

19. The horse, the vine--all things are formed for some purpose. Where
is the wonder? Even the sun saith, "I was formed for a certain work;"
and similarly the other Gods. For what end are you formed? For
pleasure?  Look if your soul can endure this thought.

20. Nature has an aim in all things, in the end and surcease of them
no less than in their beginning and continuance. It is even as a man
casting a ball. Where, then, is the good for the ball in its rising;
where the harm in dropping; where even is the harm when it has fallen
down? Where is the bubble's good while it holds together, where is the
evil when it is broken? So it is with the lamp which now burns and
anon goes out.

21. Turn out the inner side of this body, and view it as it is. What
shall it become when it grows old, or sickly, or decayed? The praiser
and the praised, the rememberer and the remembered are of short
continuance, and that in a mere corner of this narrow region, where,
narrow though it be, men cannot live in concord, no, not even with
themselves. And yet the whole world is but a point.

22. Attend well to what is before you, whether it be a principle, an
act, or a word. This your suffering is well merited, for you would
rather become good to-morrow than be good to-day.

23. Am I doing aught? Let me do it in a spirit of service to
mankind. Does aught befall me? I accept it and refer it to the Gods,
the universal source from which come all things in the chain of
consequence.

24. The accompaniments of bathing: oil, sweat, filth, foul water--how
nauseous are they all! Even so is every part of life, and everything
that meets us.

25. Lucilla buried Verus, and soon followed him to the grave. Secunda
saw the death of Maximus, and soon herself died. Epitynchanus buried
Diotimus, and then Epitynchanus was buried. Antoninus mourned
Faustina, and thereafter Antoninus was mourned. Celer buried Hadrian,
and then Celer was buried. All go the same way. The cunning men who
foretold the fates of others, or who swelled with pride--where are
they now? Where are these keen wits, Charax, and Demetrius the
Platonist, and Eudaemon, and their like? All were for a day, and are
long dead and gone; some scarce remembered even for a little after
death; some turned to fables; some faded even from the memory of
tales. Wherefore remember this: either the poor mixture which is you,
must be dispersed, or the faint breath of life must be quenched, or
removed and brought into another place.

26. The joy of man is to do his proper business. And his proper
business is to be kindly to his fellows, to rise above the stirrings
of sense, to be critical of every plausible imagination, and to
contemplate universal Nature and all her consequences.

27. We have all of us three relations: the first to the manifold
occasions of our state; the second to the supreme divine cause from
which proceed all things unto all men; the third to those with whom we
live.

28. Pain is either an evil to the body; and then let the body so
declare it; or an evil to the soul. But the soul can maintain her own
serenity and calm; and refuse to conceive pain as an evil. All
judgment, intention, desire and aversion are within the soul, to which
no evil can ascend.

29. Blot out false imaginations, and say often to yourself:--It is
now in my power to preserve my soul free from all wickedness, all
lust, all confusion or disturbance. And then, as I truly discern the
nature of things, I can use them all in due proportion. Be ever
mindful of this power which Nature has given you.

30. Speak, whether in the Senate or elsewhere, with dignity rather
than elegance; and let your words ever be sound and virtuous.

31. The court of Augustus, his wife, his daughter, his descendants and
his ancestors; his sister, and Agrippa; his kinsmen, familiars and
friends; Areius and Maecenas; his physicians and his flamens--death
has them all. Think next of the death of a whole house, such as
Pompey's, and of what we meet sometimes inscribed on tombs: He was the
last of his race. Last of all, consider the solicitude of the
ancestors of such men to leave a succession of their own
posterity. Yet, at the end, one must come the last, and with him dies
all that house.

32. Order your life in its single acts, so that if each, as far as may
be, attains its end, it will suffice. In this no one can hinder
you. But, you say, may not something external withstand me?--Nothing
can keep you from justice, temperance, and wisdom.--Yet, perhaps
some other activity of mine may be obstructed.--True, but by
yielding to this impediment, and by turning with calmness to that
which is in your power, you may happen on another course of action
equally suited to the ordered life of which we are speaking.

33. Receive the gifts of fortune without pride; and part with them
without reluctance.

34. You have seen a hand, a foot, or a head, cut off from the rest of
the body, and lying dead at a distance from it. Even such as these
does he make himself, so far as he can, who repines at what befalls,
who severs himself from his fellow-men, or who does any selfish
deed. Are you cast forth from the natural unity? Nature made you to be
a part of the whole, but you have cut yourself off from it. Yet here
there is the glorious provision that you may re-unite yourself if you
will. In no other case has God granted the privilege of re-union to a
separated or severed part. Yet behold the goodness and bounty with
which God hath honoured mankind. He first puts it in their power not
to be severed from this unity; and then, even when they are thus
severed, he suffers them to return once more, to take their places as
parts of the whole, and to grow one with it again.

35. Universal Nature, as she has imparted to each rational being
almost all its faculties and powers, has given to us this one in
particular among them. As Nature converts to her use, ranges in
destined order, and makes part of herself all that withstands or
opposes her; so each rational being can make every impediment in his
way a proper matter for himself to act upon, and can use it for his
guiding purpose, whatever it may be.

36. Do not confound yourself by considering the whole of life, and by
dwelling upon the multitude and greatness of the pains and troubles to
which you may probably be exposed. As each presents itself ask
yourself: Is there anything intolerable and insufferable in this? You
will be ashamed to own it. And then recollect that it is neither the
past nor the future that can oppress you, but always the present
only. And the ills of the present will be much diminished if you
restrict it within its own proper bounds, and take your soul to task
if it cannot bear up even against this one thing.

37. Does Panthea or Pergamus now sit mourning at the tomb of Verus, or
Chabrias or Diotimus at the tomb of Hadrian? Absurd! And if they were
still mourning could their masters be sensible of it? Or if they were
sensible of it, would it give them any pleasure? Or if they were
pleased with it, could the mourners live for ever? Was it not fate
that they should grow old men and women, and then die? What, then,
would become of the illustrious dead when these faithful souls were
gone? And all this toil for a vile body, naught but blood and
corruption!

38. If you have keen sight, says the philosopher, use it in discretion
and in wisdom.

39. In the constitution of the rational being I discern no virtue made
to restrain justice; but I see continence made to restrain sensual
pleasure.

40. Take away your opinion about the things that seem to give you
pain, and you stand yourself upon the surest ground. What is that
self?--It is reason.--I am not reason, you say.--So be it; then
let not reason pain itself, but leave any part of you which suffers to
its own opinions of the pain.

41. Obstruction of any sense is an evil for the animal nature; so is
the obstruction of any of its impulses. There are other kinds of
obstruction which are evil for the nature of plants. For the rational
nature in like manner, therefore, obstruction of the understanding is
evil. Apply all this to yourself. Do pain and pleasure affect you? Let
the senses look to it. Does anything hinder your designs? If you have
designed without the proper reservations, that in itself is an evil
for you as a reasoning being. If you designed under the general
reservation, you are neither hurt nor hindered. No man can hinder the
proper work of the mind. Nor fire, nor sword, nor tyrant, nor calumny
can reach it, nor any other thing, when it is become even as a sphere,
complete and perfect within itself.

42. I have no right to vex myself who never yet willingly vexed any
one.

43. Each man has his own pleasure. Mine lies in having my ruling part
sound; without aversion to any man, or to any hap that may befall
mankind. Yet let me look on all things with kindly eyes. Let me accept
and use them all according to their worth.

44. See that you secure the benefit of the present time. They who
pursue a fame which is to live after them reflect not that posterity
will be men even as are those who vex them now, and that they too will
be mortal. And afterwards, what shall signify to you the clatter of
their voices, or the opinions they shall entertain about you?

45. Take me up and cast me where you will; I shall have my own
divinity within me serene, that is, satisfied while its every state
and action is according to the law of its proper constitution.

Is any event of such account that my soul should suffer for it or be
the worse; that my soul should become abject and prostrate as a mean
suppliant, or should be affrighted? Shall you find anything that is
worth all this?

46. Nothing can befall a man which is not human fortune. Nothing can
happen to an ox, to a vine, or to a stone which is not the natural
destiny of their species. If, then, that alone can befall anything
which is usual and natural, what cause is there for indignation?
Universal Nature hath brought nothing upon you which you cannot bear.

47. When you are grieved about anything external it is not the thing
itself which afflicts you, but your judgment about it. This judgment
it is in your power to efface. If you are grieved about anything in
your own disposition, who can prevent you from correcting your
principles of life? If you are grieved because you do not set about
some work which seems to you sound and virtuous, go about it
effectually rather than grieve that it is undone.--But some superior
force withstands.--Then grieve not, for the fault of the omission
lies not in you.--But life is not worth living with this undone.--
Quit life then, in the same kindly spirit as though you had done it,
and with goodwill even to those who withstand you.

48. Remember that the governing part becomes invincible when,
collected into itself, it is satisfied in refusing to do what it would
not, even when its resistance is unreasonable. What then will it be
when, after due deliberation it has fixed its judgment according to
reason? The soul, thus free from passions, is a strong fort; nor can a
man find any stronger to which he can fly and become henceforth
invincible. The man who has not discerned this is ignorant. He who has
discerned and flies not thither is miserable.

49. Pronounce no more to yourself than what appearances directly
declare. It is told you that so-and-so has spoken ill of you. This
alone is told you, and not that you are hurt by it. I see my child is
sick; this only I see. I do not see that he is in danger. Dwell thus
upon first appearances; add nothing to them from within, and no harm
befalls you: or rather add the recognition that all is part of the
world's lot.

50. Is the gourd bitter? Put it from you. Are there thorns in the way?
Walk aside. That is enough. Do not add, "Why were such things brought
into the world?" The naturalist would laugh at you, just as would a
carpenter or a shoemaker, if you began fault-finding because you saw
shavings and parings from their work strewn about the workshop. These
craftsmen have places where they can throw away this rubbish, but
universal Nature has no such place outside her sphere. Yet the wonder
of her art is that, having confined herself within certain bounds, she
transforms into herself all things within her scope which seem to be
corrupting, or waxing old and useless; and out of them she makes other
new forms; so that she neither needs matter from without nor a place
where to cast out her refuse. She is satisfied with her own space, her
own material, and her own art.

51. Be not languid in action, nor confused in conversation, nor vague
in your opinions. Let there be no sudden contractions or
forth-sallyings of your soul. In your life be not over-hurried.

Men slay you, cut you to pieces, pursue you with curses. What has this
to do with your soul remaining pure, prudent, temperate, and just?
What if some one, standing by a clear sweet fountain, should reproach
it? It would not cease to send forth its refreshing waters. Should he
throw into it mud or dung, it will speedily scatter them and wash them
away, and be in nowise stained thereby. How then shall you get this
perpetual living fount within you? If you reserve yourself unto
liberty every hour you live, in a spirit of calmness, simplicity, and
modesty.

52. He who knows not what the Universe is knows not what is his place
therein. He who knows not for what end it was created, knows not
himself and knows not the world. He who is deficient in either of
these parts of knowledge cannot even say for what end he himself was
created. What sort of man then does he appear to you who pursues the
applause or dreads the anger of those who know neither where nor what
they are?

53. Do you wish to be praised by a man who curses himself thrice
within an hour? Can you desire to please one who is not pleased with
himself?  Can he be pleased with himself who repents of almost
everything he does?

54. No longer be content to breathe in harmony with the air which
surrounds you; but set about feeling in sympathy with the intelligence
which embraces all things. For the power of that intelligence is no
less diffused, and no less pervasive for all who can draw it in, than
is the virtue of the air for him who can breathe it.

55. There is no universal wickedness to hurt the world; and the
particular wickedness of any individual hurts not another. It hurts
himself alone, and even he has this gracious privilege that, as soon
as he desires it, he may be free from it altogether.

56. To my will the will of another is as indifferent as his poor
breath and flesh. And how much soever we were formed for the sake of
each other, yet the governing part of each of us has its own proper
power; otherwise the vice of another might become my own misery. God
thought fit that this should not be; lest it should be in another's
power to make me unhappy.

57. The sun seems to us diffused everywhere, pervasive of all things,
yet never exhausted. This diffusion is a sort of extension, and hence
the Greek word for rays is thought to be derived. You may observe the
nature of a ray if you see it entering through some small hole into a
darkened chamber. Its direction is straight; and it is reflected
around when it falls upon any solid body, which shuts it off from the
air beyond. There it stands and does not slip or fall. Now, such
should be the flow and diffusion of the understanding; never
exhausted, always extending; not violently or furiously dashing
against the obstacles that meet it, nor falling aside, but resting
there and illuminating whatever will receive it. That which will not
transmit the light does but deprive itself of radiance.

58. He who dreads death dreads either the extinction of all sense or
the experience of a new one. If all sense be extinguished, there can
be no sense of evil. If a different sort of sense be acquired you
become a different creature, and do not cease to live.

59. Men were created the one for the other. Teach them better then, or
bear with them.

60. Mind moves in one way, and an arrow in another. The mind, when
cautiously proceeding, or when casting round in deliberation about
what to pursue, is nevertheless carried onward straight toward its
proper mark.

61. Penetrate into the governing part of others; and also allow others
to enter into your own.

                       END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.

                               BOOK IX.

1. He who does injustice commits impiety. For since universal Nature
has formed the rational animals for one another; each to be useful to
the other according to his merit, and never hurtful; he who
transgresses this her will is clearly guilty of impiety against the
most ancient and venerable of the Gods.

He who lies sins against the same divinity. For the nature of the
whole is the nature of all things which exist; and things which exist
are akin to all that has come to be. Nature, indeed, is called truth,
and is the first cause of all truths. He, then, that lies willingly is
guilty of impiety, in so far as by deceiving he works injury: and he
also who lies unwillingly, in so far as he is out of tune with
universal Nature, and in so far as he works disorder in the Universe
by fighting against its design. He is at war with Nature who sets
himself against the truth. He has neglected the means with which
Nature furnished him, and cannot now distinguish false from true.

He, too, who pursues pleasure as good, and shuns pain as evil, is
guilty of impiety. Such a one must needs frequently blame the common
nature for unseemly awards of fortune to bad and to good men. For the
bad often enjoy pleasures and possess the means to attain them, and
the good often meet with pain and with what causes pain. Again, he who
dreads pain must sometimes dread a thing which will make part of the
world order, and this is impious. And he who pursues pleasure will not
abstain from injustice, and this is clear impiety. In those things to
which the common nature is indifferent (for she had not made both,
were she not indifferent to either), he who would follow Nature ought,
in this also, to be of like mind with her, and shew the like
indifference. And whoever is not indifferent to pain and pleasure,
life and death, glory and ignominy, all of which universal Nature uses
indifferently, is clearly impious. By Nature using them indifferently,
I mean that they befall indifferently all beings which exist, and
ensue upon others in the great chain of consequence which began in the
primal impulse of Providence. Providence, in pursuance of this
impulse, and starting from a definite beginning, set about this fair
structure of the universe when she had conceived the plan of all that
was to be, and appointed the distinct powers which were to produce the
several substances, changes, and successions.

2. It were the more desirable lot to depart from among men,
unacquainted with falsehood, hypocrisy, luxury, or vanity. The next
choice were to expire when cloyed with these vices. Have you then
chosen rather to abide in evil; or has experience not yet persuaded
you to fly from amidst the plague? For a corruption of the mind is far
more a plague than any pestilential distemper or change in the
surrounding air we breathe. The one is pestilence to animals as
animals: but the other to men as men.

3. Despise not death; but receive it well content, as one of the
things which Nature wills. For even as it is to be young, to be old,
to grow up, to be full grown; even as it is to breed teeth, and beard,
and to grow grey, to beget, to go with child, to be delivered; and to
undergo all the effects of nature which life's seasons bring; such is
it also to be dissolved in death. It becomes not therefore a man of
wisdom to be careless, or impatient, or ostentatiously contemptuous
about death; he should rather await its coming as one of the
operations of nature. Even as now you await the season when the child
of your wife's body shall issue into the light, await the hour when
your soul shall fall out of these its teguments. If you wish for the
common sort of comfort, here is a thought which goes to the heart. You
will be completely resigned to death if you consider the things you
are about to leave, and the morals of that confused crowd from which
your soul is to be disengaged. It is far from right to be offended
with them. It is even your duty to have a tender care for them, and to
bear with them mildly. Yet remember that the parting, when it comes,
will not be with men who think as you think. For the only thing which,
if it might be, could hold you back and detain you in life, would be
to live with those who had reached the same principles of life as
you. But, as it is, you, seeing how great is the fatigue and toil
arising from the jarring courses of those who live together, may cry:
"Haste, death!  lest I, too, should forget myself."

4. The sinner sins against himself. The wrong-doer wrongs himself by
making himself evil.

5. Men are often unjust by omissions as well as by actions.

6. Be satisfied with your present opinion, if certain; with your
present course of action, if social; with your present mood, if well
pleased with all that comes upon you from without.

7. Wipe out impression; stay impulse; quench desire; and keep the
governing part master of itself.

8. The soul distributed among the irrational animals is one. Rational
beings, on the other hand, partake of one reasoning intelligence. Even
so, there is one earth to all things earthy; and, for all of us who
are endowed with sight and breath, there is one light by which to see,
one air to breathe.

9. All things that share a common quality are strongly drawn to that
which is of their own kind. The earthy tends towards the earth; fluids
flow together, aerial bodies likewise; and naught but force prevents
their confluence. Fire rises upward on account of the elemental fire;
and it is so ready to join in kindling with all the fire that is here
that any matter pretty dry is easily set on fire, because that which
hinders its kindling is the weaker element in its composition. Thus
also, then, whatever partakes of the common intellectual nature
hastens in like manner, or even more markedly, towards that which is
akin to it. For the more it excels other natures, the stronger is its
tendency to mix with and adhere to its kind. Accordingly, among
irrational creatures we find swarms of bees, herds of cattle, nurture
of the young, and love, of a sort. For even in animals there is a
soul; and in the more noble natures a mutual attraction is found to be
at work, such as does not exist in plants, or stones, or wood. Among
the rational animals, again, there are societies and friendships,
families and assemblies; and, in war, treaties and truces. Among
beings still more excellent, there subsists, though they be placed far
asunder, a certain kind of union, as among the stars. Thus ascent in
the scale can produce a sympathy even in things that are widely
distant. But mark what happens among us. It is only intellectual
beings who forget the social concern for one another, and the mutual
tendency to union. Here alone the social confluence is not seen. Yet
are they environed and held by it, though they strive to escape; and
nature always prevails. Observe and you will see my meaning: for
sooner may one find some earthy thing which joins with nothing earthy,
than a man severed and separate from all men.

10. Man, God, and the Universe, all bear fruit; and each in their own
season. Custom indeed has appropriated the expression to vines and the
like; but that is nothing. Reason has its fruit both for all men and
for itself, and produces just such other things as reason itself is.

11. If you can, teach men better. If not, remember that the virtue of
charity was given you to be used in such a case. Nay, the Gods are
patient with them, and even aid them in their pursuit of some things
such as health, wealth, and glory, so gracious are they! You may be so
too. Who hinders you?

12. Bear toil and pain, not as if wretched under it, nor as courting
pity or admiration. Wish for one thing only; always to act or to
refrain as social wisdom requires.

13. To-day I have escaped from all trouble; or rather I have cast out
all trouble from me. For it was not without but within, in my own
opinions.

14. All things are, in our experience, common; in their continuance
but for a day; and in their matter sordid. All things now are as they
were in the times of those we have buried.

15. Things stand without, by themselves, neither knowing or declaring
aught to us concerning themselves. What is it then that pronounces
upon them? The ruling part.

16. It is not in passive feeling, but in action, that the good and
evil of the rational animal formed for society consists. Similarly his
virtue or his vice lies not in feeling but in action.

17. To the stone thrown up it is no evil to fall; no good to rise.

18. Penetrate the souls of men, and you will see what judges you fear,
and how they sit in judgment on themselves.

19. All things are in change. You yourself are under continual
transmutation, and, in some sort, corruption. So is the whole
universe.

20. Another's sin you must leave with himself.

21. The ceasing of any action, the extinction of any keen desire, or
of any opinion, is as it were a death to them. This is no evil. Think
again of the ages of your life; childhood, youth, manhood, old
age. Each change of these was a death. Is there anything to dread
here? Think now of your life as it was, first under your grandfather,
then under your mother, then under your father; and, as you find there
many other alterations, changes, and endings, ask yourself: Is there
anything to dread here? Thus neither is there anything to dread in the
cessation, ending, and change of your whole life.

22. Make swift appeal to your own ruling part, to that of the
Universe, and to his who has offended you. To your own, that you may
make it a mind disposed to justice; to that of the Universe, that you
may remember of what you are a part; and to his, that you may know
whether he has acted in ignorance or by design, and that you may also
reflect that he is your kinsman.

23. You yourself are a part of a social system necessary to complete
the whole. Accordingly, let your every action be a similar part of the
social life. And if any action has not its reference, either immediate
or distant, to the common good as its end, this action disorders your
life and frustrates its unity. It is sedition like that of the man
who, in a commonwealth, does all in his power to sever himself from
the general harmony and concord.

24. Children's quarrels! Child's play! Poor spirits carrying about
dead corpses! Such is our life. The 'Masque of the Dead' is
intelligible by comparison.

25. Go to the quality of the cause; abstract it from the material, and
contemplate it by itself. Determine then the time: how long, at
furthest, this thing, of this peculiar quality, can naturally subsist.

26. You have endured innumerable sufferings by not being satisfied
with your own ruling part when it does the things which it was formed
to do. Enough then of that.

27. When another reproaches or hates you, or utters anything to that
purpose; go to his soul; enter in there; and look what manner of man
he is. You will see that you need not trouble yourself to make him
think well or ill of you. Yet you should be kindly towards such men,
for they are by nature your friends: and the Gods, too, aid them in
all ways; by dreams, by oracles, and even in the things about which
they are most eager.

28. The course of things in the world is ever the same; a continual
rotation; up and down, from age to age. Either the Universal Mind
exerts itself in every particular event, in which case you must accept
what comes immediately from it: or it has exerted itself once and for
all, and, as a result, all things go on for ever, in a necessary chain
of consequence: or again atoms and indivisible particles are the
origin of all things. In fine, if there be a God, all is well; and if
there be only chance, you at least need not act by chance.

The earth will presently cover us all; and then this earth will itself
be changed into other forms, and these again into others, and so on
without end. And, if any one considers how swiftly those changes and
transmutations roll on, like one wave upon another, he will despise
all things mortal.

29. The universal cause is like a winter torrent. It sweeps all along
with it. How very little worth are those poor creatures who pretend to
understand affairs of state, and imagine they unite in themselves the
statesman and the philosopher! The frothy fools! Do you, O man! that
which Nature now requires of you. Set about it if you have the means;
and look not around you to see if any be taking notice, neither hope
to realize Plato's Republic. Be satisfied if the smallest thing go
well. Consider even such an event as no small matter. For who can
change the opinions of men? And without change of opinion what is
their state but a slavery, under which they groan, while they pretend
to obey? Come now; speak of Alexander, Philip, and Demetrius of
Phalerum. They know best whether they understood what the common
nature required of them, and whether they trained themselves
accordingly. But, if they designed only to play the tragic hero, no
one has condemned me to do the like. The work of philosophy is simple
and modest. Lead me not astray in pursuit of a vainglorious
stateliness.

30. Look down, as from some eminence, upon the innumerable herds, the
countless solemn festivals, the voyaging of every sort, in tempests
and in calms; the different states of those who come into life, enter
upon life's associations, and leave it in the end. Consider, too, the
life which others have lived formerly, the life they will live after
you, and the life that barbarous peoples are now living. How many of
these know not even your name; how many will quickly forget it; how
many are there who perhaps praise you now, but will shortly blame
you. Reflect, then, that neither is surviving fame a thing of value;
nor present glory; nor anything at all.

31. Let nothing due to a cause outside yourself disturb your calm. In
the workings of the active principle within you let there be justice:
that is a bent of will and a course of action which have social good
as their one end, and so are suited to your nature.

32. You can suppress many of the superfluous troubles which beset you,
for they lie wholly in your own opinion. By this you will give ample
room and ease to your life. You may compass this end by comprehending
the whole Universe in your judgment; by contemplating eternity; and by
reflecting on the swift changes of individual things, thinking how
short is the time from their birth to their dissolution, how immense
the space of ages before that birth, how equally infinite the eternity
which shall succeed that dissolution.

33. All things that you see will quickly perish; and those who behold
them perishing are very soon themselves to die. And he who dies oldest
will be in like case with him who dies before his time.

34. What manner of souls have these men? What is the end of their
striving; and on what accounts do they love and honour? Imagine their
souls naked before you. When they fancy that their censures hurt, or
their praises profit us, how great is their self-conceit!

35. Loss is naught but change; in change is the joy of universal
Nature, and by her all things are ordered well. From the beginning of
ages they have been shaped alike, and to all eternity they will be the
same. How then can you say that all things have been, and ever will be
evil; that among so many Gods there has been found no power to
rectify; but that the Universe is condemned to endure the burden of
never-ending ill?

36. How corrupt is the material substance of every thing, water, dust,
bones, and foulness! Again; marble is but the concrete humour of the
earth, gold and silver its heavy dregs. Our garments are but hair, the
purple dye blood. All else is of a like nature. Breath, too, is just
the same, ever changing from this to that.

37. Enough of this wretched life: enough of repining and apish
trifling. Why are you disturbed? Are any of these troubles new? What
excites you so? Is it the cause?

Then view it well. Is it the matter? View it also well. Besides these
there is nothing. Wherefore at last act with more simplicity and
goodness towards the Gods. Whether you look on this spectacle for a
hundred years or for three it is the same.

38. If he has done wrong, the evil is with him: and perhaps, too, he
has not done wrong.

39. Either all things proceed from one source of intelligence and come
together in one body, in which case the part must not complain of what
comes about for the benefit of the whole; or all is atoms, and there
is nothing else but confused mixture and dissipation. Why then are you
disturbed? Say to your soul: "Thou art dead: thou art rotten: thou
hast turned beast, joined the herd, and dost feed along with them."

40. Either the Gods have power or they have none. If they have no
power, why do you pray? If they have power, why do you not choose to
pray to them for power neither to fear, nor to desire, nor to be
grieved over any of these external things, rather than for their
presence or their absence? Surely, if the Gods can aid man at all,
they can aid him in this. But perhaps you will say "the Gods have put
this in my own power." Then is it not better to use that which is in
your own power and preserve your liberty, than to set your heart on
what is beyond your power and become an abject slave? And who has told
you that the Gods aid us not in these things also which are in our
power? Begin to pray about them and you will see. One man prays: "May
I possess that woman!" Do you pray: "May I have no wish to possess
her!" Another prays: "May I be delivered from so and so!" Pray you:
"May I not need to be delivered from him!" A third cries: "May I not
lose my child!"  Let your prayer be: "May I not fear to lose him!" In
fine, turn your prayers this way, and observe what comes of it.

41. Epicurus says: "In my sickness my conversations were not about the
diseases of this poor body; nor did I speak of any such things to
those who came to me. I continued to discourse as before on the
principles of natural Philosophy, and was chiefly intent on the
problem of how the mind, though it partakes in the violent commotions
of the flesh, might remain undisturbed and keep guard on its own
proper excellence. I permitted not the physicians," he continues, "to
magnify their office, and vaunt themselves as if they were
doing-something of great moment, but my life continued pleasant and
happy." What he did then, in sickness, do you also if ye fall ill, or
suffer any other misfortune. Never to depart from your philosophy
whatever befalls you, never to join in the folly of the vulgar and the
ignorant, is a maxim common to all the schools. Give your mind only to
the business now in hand and to the means whereby it is to be
accomplished.

42. When you are offended by the shamelessness of any man, straightway
ask yourself: Can the world exist without shameless men? It
cannot. Therefore do not demand what is impossible. Your enemy also is
one of these shameless people who must needs be in the universe. Have
the same question also at hand when you are shocked at craft, or
perfidy, or any other sin. For while you remember that it is
impossible that the class should not exist, you will be more
charitable to each particular individual. It is useful also to have
this reflection ready: What virtue has nature given to man wherewith
to combat this fault? Against unreason she has given meekness as an
antidote; against another weakness another power. You are also at full
liberty to set right one who has wandered; now every wrong-doer is
missing his proper aim and has gone astray. And then, in what are you
injured? You will find that none of those at whom you are exasperated
have done anything whereby your intellectual part was like to be the
worse. Now anything which can really harm or hurt you has its
subsistence there, and there alone. And wherein is it strange or evil
that the man untaught acts after his kind? Look if you ought not
rather to blame yourself for not having laid your account with his
being guilty of such faults. Your reason gave you the means to
conclude that it was probable that he would do this wrong; you forgot,
and yet wonder that he has done it. But above all, when you are
blaming any one for faithlessness or ingratitude, turn to
yourself. The fault lies manifestly with you, if you trusted that a
man of such a disposition could keep faith; or if, when you granted
the favour, you did not grant it without ulterior views, and on the
principle that the complete and immediate reward of your action lay in
the doing of it. What would you more, when you have done a man a
kindness? Is it not enough for you that you have acted in this
according to your nature? Do you ask a reward for it? It is as if the
eye were to ask a reward for seeing, or the feet for walking. For just
as these parts are formed for a certain purpose, which when they
fulfil according to their proper structure, they attain their proper
end; so man, formed by nature to do kindness to his fellows, whenever
he acts kindly, or in any other way works for the common good, has
fulfilled the purpose of his creation, and has possession of what is
his own.

                        END OF THE NINTH BOOK.

                               BOOK X.

1. Wilt thou ever, O my soul, be good and single, and one, and naked,
more open to view than the body which surrounds thee? Wilt thou ever
taste of the loving and satisfied temper? Wilt thou ever be full and
without wants, setting thy heart on nothing, animate or inanimate, for
the enjoyment of pleasure; not desiring time for longer enjoyment; nor
place, nor country, nor fine climate, nor congenial company? Wilt thou
be satisfied with thy present state, and well pleased with every
present circumstance? Wilt thou persuade thyself that all things are
thine; that all is well with thee; that all comes to thee from the
Gods; and that what is best for thee is what they are pleased to give,
now and henceforth, for the preservation of that perfected being,
which is good, just, and beautiful; which generates, combines,
embraces, and includes all fleeting things that dissolve to bring
forth others like themselves? Wilt thou never be able to live a fellow
citizen with Gods and men, approving them and by them approved?

2. In so far as you are governed by nature only, observe carefully
what nature demands; then do that freely, if thereby your nature as a
living being be not made worse. Next you must consider what the nature
of a living being demands, and allow yourself everything of this kind
by which your nature as a rational being is not made worse. Now it is
plain that what is rational is also social. Therefore follow these
rules and trouble no further.

3. Whatever happens, Nature has either formed you able to bear it or
unable. If able, then bear it as Nature has made you able, and fret
not. If unable, yet do not fret, for when the trial has consumed you
it too will pass away. Remember, however, that Nature has made you
able to bear whatever it is in the power of your own opinion to make
endurable or tolerable, if only you conceive it profitable or fit to
be borne.

4. If a man is going wrong, instruct him kindly, and shew him his
mistake. If you are unable to do this, blame yourself or none.

5. Whatever happens to you was prearranged for you from all eternity;
and the concatenation of causes had from eternity interwoven your
existence with this contingency.

6. Whether all be atoms, or there be a universal Law of Nature, let it
be laid down first that I am a part of the whole which is governed by
Nature; secondly, that I am associated with other parts like
myself. Mindful of this, since I am a part, I shall not be
dissatisfied with anything appointed me by the whole. For nothing is
hurtful to the part which is profitable to the whole, since the whole
contains nothing unprofitable to itself. All natural systems have this
law in common, and the system of the Universe has another law besides;
namely that it cannot be forced by any external cause to produce
anything hurtful to itself. If therefore I remember that I am part of
such a whole, I shall be satisfied with all that flows therefrom. And,
inasmuch as I am associated with parts like myself, I will do nothing
unsocial; but rather draw to my kind, turn my every endeavour to the
public good, and shun the contrary. In such a course my life must
needs run well, just as you would hold that the life of a citizen runs
well when he passes on from one public-spirited action to another, and
throws himself heartily into every task appointed him by the State.

7. The parts of the whole, I mean the parts which are contained in the
Universe, must necessarily perish; "perish," let us say, meaning
change. Now, if it be a necessary evil for the parts to perish, it
could not be well for the whole that its parts should tend to change
and be constructed to perish in various ways. Did Nature then set out
to injure her own constituent parts, making them so that they are
liable to evil and of necessity fall into it; or did it escape her
notice that this comes to pass? Both suppositions are incredible. And
if, dropping the notion of Nature, one were merely to put it that
things are constituted so, then how ridiculous at the same time to say
that the parts of the Universe are constituted so as to change, and
also to wonder and fret at change or dissolution, as if it were
something against the course of Nature; especially as everything is
dissolved into the elements out of which it arose. For there is either
a scattering of the elements of which a thing was constructed, or a
conversion of these, of the solid into earth, of the spiritual into
air. So that these constituents are resumed into the system of the
Universe, which either undergoes periodical conflagration, or is
renewed by never-ending changes. And do not imagine that you had all
your earthy and aerial matter from your birth. For the whole of this
was an accession of yesterday or the day before, from your food and
from the air you breathed. It is this accession which changes, and not
what your mother bore. And granting that this recent accession may
incline you more to what is individual in your constitution; yet, I
think, it alters nothing of what has just been said.

8. Having taken to yourself these titles: good, modest, true, prudent,
even-tempered and magnanimous, look to it that you change them not;
and, if you should come to lose them, seek them straightway again. And
remember that prudence means for you reasoned observation of all
things, and careful attention; even temper, cheerful acceptance of the
lot appointed by universal Nature; magnanimity, the exaltation of the
thinking part above any pleasant or painful commotions of the flesh,
above vain-glory, above death and all such things. If you steadfastly
maintain yourself in these titles, with no hankering after hearing
them given to you by others, you will be a new man, and a new life
will open for you. For to continue as you have been till now, in the
same life of distraction and defilement, would mark you as a man
devoid of sense, who clings to life like the half-eaten
beast-fighters, who, though covered with wounds and gore, do yet
appeal to be reserved until tomorrow, to be cast again in their
wretchedness to the claws and fangs that lacerated them before. Take
your stand then on these few titles; and if you are able to abide in
them, abide, as one removed to the Islands of the Blest. But if you
perceive that you are falling away, and cannot prevail; have the
courage to retire into some corner where you may hope to prevail, or
else depart from life altogether, not in anger but in all simplicity,
freedom, and modesty, having done at least one thing in life well, by
so leaving it. Now it will greatly help you to be mindful of your
titles, if you recollect that the Gods desire not adulation, but that
reasoning beings should grow in likeness to themselves; and further
that a fig tree is set to bear figs, a dog to hunt, a bee to gather
honey, and a man to do a man's work.

9. Mimes, war, panic, sloth, servility, will wipe out the sacred
maxims which you have gathered by observing Nature and stored in your
mind. You ought to look and act in every case so that not only shall
the task before you be accomplished, but also your theoretic faculty
exercised, and the self-confidence which springs from special
knowledge preserved without ostentation or affected concealment. Will
you ever attain to simplicity; to dignity; to a perfect discrimination
in every case as to what a thing really is, what its true place in the
Universe, what the time it may endure, what its composition, to whom
it may belong, and who can give and take it away?

10. The spider exults when he has captured a fly; one man because he
has taken a little hare, another because he has netted an anchovy,
another because he has hunted down a wild boar or a bear; and another
because he has conquered the Sarmatians. But are they not brigands
all, if you look to their principles.

11. Acquire a method of perceiving how all things change into one
another. Pursue this branch of Philosophy and continually exercise
yourself therein. There is nothing so proper as this for cultivating
greatness of mind. He who does so has already put off the body; and,
having realized how soon he must depart from among men and leave all
earthly things behind him, he resigns himself entirely to justice in
all his own actions, and to the law of the Universe in everything else
which happens. As for what any one may say or think of him or do
against him, he gives it not a thought, but contents himself with
these two things: to do justly what he has in hand, and to love the
lot appointed for him. Such a man has thrown off all hurry and bustle;
and has no other will but this, to keep the straight path according to
the law, and to follow God whose path is ever straight.

12. What need for suspicion when it is open for you to consider what
ought to be done? If you see your way, proceed in it calmly,
inflexibly. If you do not see it, pause and consult the best
advisers. If any other obstacle arise, proceed with prudent caution,
according to the means you have; keeping always close to what appears
just. That is the best to which you can attain: and failure in that is
the only proper miscarriage. He who in everything follows reason is
always at leisure, yet ever ready for action, always cheerful, yet
composed.

13. As soon as you awake ask yourself: Will it be of consequence to
you if what is just and good be done by some other man? It will
not. Have you forgotten what manner of men in bed and at table are
those who make such display in praise and blame of others; what they
do, what they shun and what they pursue; how they steal and how they
rob, not with hands and feet but with their most precious part,
whereby, if a man will, he may gain faith, modesty, truth, law, a good
directing spirit?

14. To Nature, which gives and again resumes all things, the
well-instructed, modest man will say: "Give what thou wilt; take again
what thou wilt." And this he says, not with ostentation, but out of
pure obedience and good will to Nature.

15. What remains to you of this life is little. Live as on a
mountain. For it makes no difference whether we live here or there,
provided we live like citizens everywhere in the world. Let men see
and know you as a man indeed, living according to Nature. If they
cannot endure you, let them slay you. It is better so than to live as
they live.

16. Discourse no more of what a good man should be; but be one.

17. Constantly imagine all time and all existence; and think that
every individual thing is in substance a fig seed, and in time the
turn of an auger.

18. Consider each of the things around you as already dissolving, in a
state of change, and as it were corrupting and being dissipated, or
as, one and all, formed by Nature to die.

19. What sort of men are they when they are eating, sleeping,
procreating, easing nature, and the like? Then see them lording it
over their fellows, puffed up with pride, angry, or issuing judgments
from on high! To how many were they slaves but lately, and why! And in
what case will they shortly be?

20. That is for the advantage of every man which is brought by
universal Nature; and for his advantage at the very time at which she
brings it.

21. "Earth loves the rain;" "and the majestic Ether loves." The
Universe loves to bring about whatever is coming to be. I then will
say to the Universe: "What thou lovest I love." Is it not a common
saying that, "so-and-so loves to happen?"

22. Either you are living here your accustomed life; or you are going
abroad, and that at your own will: or you are dying, and your public
office is discharged. Now, besides these there is nothing. Be
therefore of good courage.

23. Keep this ever clear before you: that a country retreat is just
like any other place. All things here go the same as on a mountain
top, or on the sea beach, or where you will. You may always find that
life of the wise man who, in Platonic phrase, "makes the city wall
serve him for a shepherd's fold on the mountains."

24. What is my soul to me? What am I making of it, and to what purpose
am I now using it? Is it void of understanding? Is it loosened and
rent from the great community? Is it glued to, and mingled with, the
flesh so as to follow each fleshly motion?

25. Whoever flies from his master is a runaway. Our master is the law,
and the law-breaker is a runaway; and so is he also who through grief,
or anger, or fear will not acquiesce in something that has happened,
is happening, or will happen, in the course of things predestined by
the all-ruling power which is the law, laying down for every man what
is proper for him. He then who is afraid or grieved or angry, is a
runaway.

26. He who has cast seed into the womb departs; another cause takes
and works upon it and completes the child. How wonderful the result
from such a beginning! The child, again, takes food down its throat;
another cause takes and transforms it into sensation, motion, in a
word into life and strength and other things, how many and surprising!
Consider then these things happening in such hidden ways, and view the
power which produces them just as we perceive the gravitation and
levitation of bodies; not indeed with our eyes, yet none the less
clearly.

27. Continually reflect that all that is happening now happened
exactly in the same way before; and reflect that the like will happen
again. Place before your eyes all that you have ever known from your
own experience or from ancient history; dramas and scenes, all
similar; such as the whole court of Hadrianus, the whole court of
Antoninus, the whole court of Philip, of Alexander, of Croesus. All
these were similar, only the actors different.

28. Imagine every one who is grieved or storms about anything
whatever, to be like the pig in a sacrifice, which kicks and screams
under the knife. Such, too, is he who, on his couch, deplores in
silence, by himself, that we are all tied to our fate. Reflect also
that only to a rational being is it given to submit to what happens
willingly; the bare submission is a necessity upon all.

29. Look attentively on each particular thing you do, and ask yourself
if death be a terror because it deprives you of this.

30. When you are offended at any one's fault, turn at once to yourself
and consider of what similar fault you yourself are guilty; such as
esteeming for good things, money, pleasure, a little glory, or the
like. By fixing your attention on this you will speedily forget your
anger, especially if it occur to you that he acts under compulsion and
cannot do otherwise; else, if it be in your power, relieve him from
the compulsion.

31. When you have seen Satyrio the Socratic, think of Eutyches or
Hymen; when you have seen Euphrates, think of Eutychio or
Silvanus. When Alciphron comes before you, think of Tropaeophorus; and
when Xenophon think of Crito or Severus. When you look upon yourself
think of any of the Caesars, and with every man likewise. Then let
this occur to you: Where, now, are these? Nowhere; or who can tell?
For thus you will see all human things to be smoke and nothingness;
especially if you call to mind that what has once been changed will
never exist again through all the infinity of time. Why then this
concern? And why does it not suffice you to live out your short span
in well ordered wise? What material, what a subject for Philosophy you
are shunning! For what are all earthly things but exercises for the
rational power, when it has viewed all things that occur in life
accurately and in their natural order? Abide then until you have
assimilated all these things, as a strong stomach assimilates every
variety of food, as a bright fire turns whatever you throw upon it
into flame and radiance.

32. Let no man have it in his power to say with truth of you that you
are not a man of simplicity, candour, and goodness. But let him prove
to be mistaken who holds any such opinion of you. This is quite in
your power; for who shall hinder you from being good and
single-hearted?  Only do you determine to live no longer if you cannot
be such a man; for neither does reason require, in that case, that you
should.

33. In the present matter what is the soundest that can be done or
said?  For, whatever that may be, you are at liberty to do or say
it. Make no excuses as if hindered. You will never cease from groaning
until your disposition is such that what luxury is to men of pleasure,
that to you is doing what is suitable to the constitution of man on
every occasion that is thrown or falls in your way. You should regard
as enjoyment everything which you are at liberty to do in accordance
with your own proper nature; and this liberty you have everywhere. Now
to the cylinder it is not given to move everywhere with its proper
motion; nor to water, nor to fire, nor to any other thing that is
governed by a natural law only, or by a soul irrational; for there are
many circumstances which constrain and stop them. But intelligent
reason can pursue through every obstacle the course for which it was
created, and which it wills to follow. Set before your eyes this ease
with which reason makes its way through all obstacles, as fire goes
upwards, a stone downwards, or a cylinder down a slope, and seek for
nothing further. The rest of man's difficulties are merely of the
body, the lifeless part of him; or else they are such as cannot crush,
or in any way injure him save through opinion, or the surrender of
reason itself: otherwise he who suffered by them would himself
straightway become evil. In the case of all other organisms, when
mishap befalls, the sufferer is thereby rendered worse. But in this
respect it may be said that a man becomes better and more praiseworthy
by rightly using his circumstances. In fine, remember that nothing
which hurts not the city hurts the man who is by nature a citizen; nor
does that hurt the city which hurts not the law. Now, none of the
things called misfortunes can hurt the law. Accordingly, what hurts
not the law can hurt neither city nor citizen.

34. To the man who is penetrated with true principles, the shortest, the
most common hint is a sufficient memorial to keep him free of sorrow
and fear. Such as:--

      Some leaves the winds blow down: the fruitful wood
      Breeds more meanwhile, which in springtide appear.
      Of men thus ends one race, while one is born.

Your children are leaves; leaves, too, the creatures who confidently
cry aloud and deal out eulogy, or, it may be, curses; or who carp and
jeer in secret. Leaves, likewise, are they who transmit our fame to
posterity. All these "in springtide appear;" then the wind shakes them
down, and the forest grows more to take their places. Shortness of
life is common to all things, yet you shun and pursue them, as though
they were to have no ending. But a little and you will fall asleep;
and anon others shall mourn for him who carried your bier.

35. The healthy eye ought to look on everything visible, and not to
say, "I want green," like an eye that is diseased. Sound hearing or
sense of smell ought to be ready for all that can be heard or smelt;
and the healthy stomach should be equally disposed for all sorts of
food, as a mill for all that it was built to grind. So also the
healthy mind should be ready for all things that happen. That mind
which says, "Let my children be spared, and let men applaud my every
action," is as an eye which begs for green, or as teeth which require
soft food.

36. There is no man so happily fated but that when he is dying some
bystander will rejoice at the doom which is coming upon him. Were he a
virtuous and wise man; will not some one at the last say within
himself: "At last I shall breathe freely, unoppressed by this
pedagogue. He was not indeed hard on any of us; but I always felt that
he tacitly condemned us"? This they would say of a good man. But, in
my own case, how many more reasons are there why a multitude would
rejoice to be rid of me? You will reflect on this when dying, and
depart with the less regret when you consider: "I am leaving a life
from which my very partners, for whom I toiled, and prayed, and
planned, are wishing me to begone; hoping, it may be, to gain some
additional advantage from my departure." Why then should one strive
for a longer sojourn here? Yet let not your parting with them be less
pleasant on this account. Preserve your own character, remain to them
friendly, benevolent, gracious. On the other hand, depart from your
fellow-men, not as if torn away; but let your going be like that of
one who dies an easy death, whose soul is gently released from the
body. Nature knit and cemented you to your fellows, but now she parts
you from them. I part, then, as from relations, not reluctant, but
unconstrained. For death, too, is a thing accordant with nature.

37. Accustom yourself as much as possible, when any one takes any
action, to consider only: To what end is he working? But begin at
home; and examine yourself first of all.

38. Remember that the mover of the puppet strings is the hidden
principle within. It is that which is eloquence; that which is life;
that, if I may say so, which is the man. Never, in your imagination,
confound that principle with the surrounding earthen vessel and the
little organs that are kneaded on to it. Excepting that they grow upon
us, they are like the carpenter's axe; since, without the moving and
restraining principle, none of these parts in itself is of any greater
service than the shuttle to the weaver, the pen to the writer, or the
whip to the charioteer.

                        END OF THE TENTH BOOK.

                               BOOK XI.

1. These are the characteristics of the rational soul: It beholds
itself; it regulates itself in every part; it fashions itself as it
wills; the fruit it bears itself enjoys, whereas the products of
plants and of the lower animals are enjoyed by others. It reaches its
individual end, wheresoever the close of life may overtake it. In a
dance or an actor's part any interruption spoils the completeness of
the whole action. Not so with the rational soul. At whatever point in
its action, or wheresoever it is overtaken by death, it makes its part
complete and all-sufficient; so that it can say, "I have received what
is mine." Also it ranges through the whole universe, and the void
around it, and discerns its plan. It stretches forth into limitless
eternity, and grasps the periodical regeneration of all things, seeing
and comprehending that those who come after us will see nothing new,
and that those that went before saw no more than we have seen. Nay, a
man of forty, of any tolerable understanding, has, because of the
uniformity of things, seen, in a manner, all that has been or will
be. Characteristic of the rational soul also are:--Love to all around
us, truth, modesty; and respect for itself above all other things,
which is characteristic also of the general law. Thus there is no
discordance between right reason and the reason of justice.

2. You will think little of a pleasing song, a dance, or a gymnastic
display, if you analyse the melody into its separate notes, and ask
yourself regarding each, "Does this impress me?" You will blush to own
it; and so also if you analyse the dance into its single motions and
postures, and if you similarly treat the gymnastic display. In general
then, except as regards virtue and virtuous action, remember to recur
to the constituent parts of things, and by dissecting to despise them;
and transfer this practice to life as a whole.

3. How happy is the soul that stands ready to part from the body when
it must, and either to be extinguished or to be scattered, or to
survive!  But let this readiness arise from individual judgment, not
from mere obstinacy, as with the Christians, but deliberately, with
dignity, and with no affected air of tragedy; so that others may be
led to a like disposition.

4. Have I done anything for the common good? Is not this itself my
advantage? Let this thought be ever with you, and desist not.

5. What is your art? Well doing. And how else can this come than from
sound general principles regarding Nature as a whole, and the
constitution of man in particular?

6. First of all, tragedy was introduced to remind us that certain
events happen, and are fated to happen as they do; and to teach us
that what entertains us on the stage should not grieve us on the
greater stage of the world. You see that such things must be
accomplished; and that even they bore them who cried aloud, O
Cithaeron! Our dramatic poets have said some excellent things;
especially the following:--

    Me and my children, if the Gods neglect,
    It is for some good reason--

and again,

    Vain is all anger at external things;

and,

    To reap our life like ears of ripened corn--

and the like.

And after tragedy came the Old Comedy, using a schoolmaster's freedom
of speech, and employing plain language with great profit to inculcate
the duty of humility. To this end Diogenes used a method much the
same. Next consider the nature of the Middle Comedy; and lastly for
what purpose the New was introduced, which gradually degenerated into
the mere ingenuity of artificial mimicry. It is well known that some
useful things were said by the New Comic Writers; but what useful end
had they in view in all their accumulated poetry and playmaking?

7. How manifest it is that no other course of life was more adapted to
the practice of philosophy than that which now is yours.

8. A branch cut off from its adjacent branch must necessarily be
severed from the whole tree. Even so a man, parted from any
fellow-man, has fallen away from the whole social community. Now a
branch is cut off by some external agency; but a man by his own action
separates himself from his neighbour--by hatred and aversion, unaware
that he has thus torn himself away from the universal polity. Yet
there is always given us the good gift of Zeus, who founded the great
community, whereby it is in our power to be reingrafted on our kind,
and to become once more, natural parts completing the whole. Yet the
frequent happening of such separations, makes the reunion and
restoration of the separated member more and more difficult. And in
general a branch which has grown from the first upon a tree, and
remained a living part of it, is not like one which has been cut and
reingrafted; as the gardeners would say, they are of the same growth
but of different persuasion.

9. As those who oppose you in the path of right reason have no power
to divert you from sane action, so let them not turn you away from
amenity towards themselves. Be watchful alike to persist in stable
judgment and action, and in meekness towards those who would hinder or
otherwise molest you. It is equally weak to grow angry with them or to
desist from action and submit to defeat. Both are equally deserters--
he who runs away, and he who refuses to stand by friend and kinsman.

10. Nature cannot be inferior to Art. The Arts are but imitations of
Nature. If this be so, that Nature which is the most perfect and
comprehensive of all cannot be inferior to the best artistic
skill. Now all Arts use inferior material for higher purposes; so also
then does universal Nature. Hence the origin of justice, from which
again the other virtues spring. Justice cannot be preserved if we are
solicitous about things indifferent, if we are easily deceived, rash,
and changeable.

11. If those things, the pursuit and avoidance of which trouble you,
come not to you; but, as it happens, you go to them; then let your
judgment be at peace concerning them, they will remain motionless, and
you will no more be seen pursuing or avoiding them.

12. The sphere of the soul attains to perfect shape when it neither
expands to what is without, nor contracts upon what is within; neither
wrinkles nor collapses, but shines with a radiance whereby it discerns
the truth of all things, both without itself and within.

13. Does any man contemn me? Let him look to that. And let me look to
it that I be found doing or saying nothing worthy of his
contempt. Does any one hate me? That is his affair. I shall be kind
and good-natured to every one, and ready to shew his mistake to him
that hates me; not in order to upbraid him, or to make a show of my
patience, but from genuine goodness, like Phocion, if he indeed was
sincere. Your inward character should be such that the Gods may see
you neither angry nor repining at anything. What evil is it for you
now to act according to your nature, and to accept now what is
seasonable to the nature of the Universe; you, a man appointed to do
some service for the common good?

14. Although they despise, yet they flatter one another. Although they
desire to overtop, yet they cringe to one another.

15. How rotten and insincere is his profession who says, "I mean to
deal straightforwardly with you." What are you doing, man? There is no
need for such a preface. It will appear of itself. Such a profession
should be written clearly on your forehead. A man's character should
shine forth clearly from his eyes; as the beloved sees that he is so
in the glances of those that love him. The straightforward, good man
should be like one of rank odour who can be recognised by the passer
by as soon as he approaches, whether he will or no. The ostentation of
straightforwardness is the knife under the cloak. Nothing is baser
than wolf-friendship. Shun it above all things. The good,
straightforward, kindly man bears all these qualities in his eyes, and
is not to be mistaken.

16. To live the best life is within the power of the soul, if it be
indifferent to indifferent things. And it will be indifferent if it
looks on all such things, severally and wholly, with discrimination;
mindful that not one of them can impose upon us an opinion concerning
itself, or can come of itself to us. Things stand motionless without;
and it is we that form opinions about them within, and, as it were,
write these opinions upon our hearts. We may avoid so writing them;
or, if one has crept in unawares, we may instantly blot it out. 'Tis
but for a short time that we shall need this vigilance, and then life
will cease. For the rest, why should we hold this to be difficult? If
it be according to Nature, rejoice in it, and it will become easy for
you. If it be contrary to Nature, search out what suits your nature,
and follow it diligently, even though it be attended with no glory;
for every man will be forgiven for seeking his own proper good.

17. Consider whence each thing came, of what it was compounded, into
what it will be changed, how it will be with it when changed, and that
it will suffer no evil.

18. As to those who offend me, let me consider:

First, how I am related to mankind; that we are formed, the one for
the other; and that, in another respect, I was set over them as the
ram over the flock, and the bull over the herd. Consider yet more
deeply, thus:--There is either an empire of atoms, or an intelligent
Nature governing the whole. If the latter, the inferior beings are
created for the superior, and the superior for each other.

Secondly: Consider what manner of men they are at table, in bed, or
elsewhere; and especially by what principles they hold themselves
bound, and with what arrogance they entertain them.

Thirdly: If they act rightly, we ought not to take it amiss; and, if
not rightly, manifestly they do so without intention and in
ignorance. For no soul is willingly deprived of truth, or of the
faculty of treating every man as he deserves. Accordingly men are
grieved to be called unjust, ungrateful, greedy, and, in short,
sinners against their neighbours.

Fourthly: You yourself do often sin, and are no better than
another. And, if you abstain from certain sins, still you have the
disposition to commit them, even if through cowardice, fear for your
character, or other meanness, you hold back.

Fifthly: You cannot even be perfectly sure that wrong has been done,
for many things admit of justification. And, generally speaking, a man
must have learned much before he can pronounce surely upon the conduct
of others.

Sixthly: When you are vexed or worried overmuch, remember that man's
life is but for a moment, and that in a little we shall all be laid to
rest.

Seventhly: It is not the acts of others that disturb us. Their actions
reside in their own souls. Our own opinions alone disturb us. Away
with them then; will that you entertain no thought of calamity
befallen you, and the anger is gone. But how remove them?  By
reasoning that there is no dishonour; for, if you hold not that
dishonour alone is evil, verily you must fall into many crimes, you
may become a robber, or any sort of villain.

Eighthly: How much worse evils we suffer from anger and grief about
certain things than from the things themselves about which these
passions arise.

Ninthly: Meekness is invincible if it be genuine, without simper or
hypocrisy. For what can the most insolent of men do to you, if you
persist in civility towards him; and, if occasion offers, admonish him
gently and deliberately, shew him the better way at the very moment
that he is endeavouring to harm you? "Nay, my son; we were born for
something better. No hurt can come to me; it is yourself you hurt, my
son." And point out to him delicately, and as a general principle, how
the matter stands; that bees and other gregarious animals do not act
like him. But this must be done without irony or reproach, rather with
loving-kindness and no bitterness of spirit; not as though you were
reading him a lesson, or seeking admiration from any bystander, but as
if you designed your remarks for him alone, though others may be
present.

Remember these nine precepts as gifts received from the Muses; and
begin now to be human for the rest of your life. Beware equally of
being angry with men and of flattering them. Both are unsocial and
lead to mischief. In all anger recollect that wrath is not becoming to
a man; but that meekness and gentleness, as they are more human, are
also more manly. Strength and nerves and courage are the portion of
the meek and gentle man; and not of the irascible and impatient. For
the nearer a man attains to freedom from passion, the nearer he comes
to strength. A weak man in grief is like a weak man in anger. Both are
hurt, and both give way.

If you want a tenth gift, from the Leader of the Muses, take this:--
To expect the wicked not to sin is madness. It is to expect an
impossibility. But to allow them to injure others, and to forbid them
to injure you, is foolish and tyrannical.

19. There are four states of the soul against which you must
continually and especially be upon your guard; and which, when
detected, should be effaced, by remarking thus of each. "This thought
is unnecessary. This tends to social dissolution. You could not say
this from your heart; and to speak otherwise than from the heart you
must regard as the most absurd conduct." And, fourthly, whatever
causes self-reproach is an overpowering or subjection of the diviner
part within you to the less honourable and mortal part, the body, and
to its grosser tendencies.

20. The serial and igneous parts of which you are compounded, although
they naturally tend upwards, nevertheless obey the general law of the
Universe, and are retained here in composition. The earthy and humid
parts of you, though they naturally tend downwards, are nevertheless
supported and remain where they are, although not in their natural
situation. Thus the elements, wheresoever placed by the superior
power, obey the whole; waiting till the signal shall sound again for
their dissolution. Is it not grievous that the intellectual part alone
should be disobedient, and fret at its function? Yet is no violence
done to it, nothing imposed contrary to its nature. Still it is
impatient, and tends to opposition. For all its tendencies towards
injustice, debauchery, wrath, sorrows, and fears are so many
departures from Nature. And, when the soul frets at any particular
event, it is deserting its appointed station. It is formed for
holiness and piety toward God, no less than for justice. These last
are branches of social goodness even more venerable than the practice
of justice.

21. He whose aim in life is not always one and the same cannot himself
be one and the same through his whole life. But singleness of aim is
not sufficient, unless you consider also what that aim ought to
be. For, as there is not agreement of opinion regarding all those
things which are reckoned good by the majority, but only as regards
some of them such as are of public utility; so your aim should be
social and political. For he alone who directs all his personal aims
to such an end can reach a uniform course of conduct, and thus be ever
the same man.

22. Remember the country mouse and the town mouse; and how the latter
feared and trembled.

23. Socrates called the maxims of the vulgar hobgoblins, bogies to
frighten children.

24. The Spartans at their public shows set seats for strangers in the
shade, but sat themselves where they found room.

25. Socrates made this excuse for not going to Perdiccas upon his
invitation: "Lest I should come to the worst of all ends, by receiving
favours which I could not return."

26. In the writings of the Ephesians there is a precept, frequently to
call to remembrance some of those who cultivated virtue of old.

27. The Pythagoreans recommended that we should look at the heavens in
the morning, to put us in mind of beings that go on doing their proper
work uniformly and continuously; and of their order, purity and naked
simplicity; for there is no veil upon a star.

28. Think of Socrates clad in a skin, when Xanthippe had taken his
cloak and gone out; and what he said to his friends, who were ashamed,
and would have left him when they saw him dressed in such an
extraordinary fashion.

29. In writing and reading you must be led before you can lead. Much
more is this so in life.

30. Yourself a slave, your speech cannot be free.

31. And my heart laughed within me.

32. Virtue herself they blame with harshest words.

33. To look for figs in winter is madness; and so it is to long for a
child that may no longer be yours.

34. Epictetus said that, when you kiss your child, you should whisper
within yourself: "To-morrow perhaps he may die." "Ill-omened words!"
say you. "The words have no evil omen," says he, "but simply indicate
an act of Nature. Is it of evil omen to say the corn is reaped?"

35. The green grape, the ripe cluster, the dried grape are all
changes, not into nothing, but into that which is not at present.

36. No man can rob you of your liberty of action; as has been said by
Epictetus.

37. He tells us also that we must find out the true art of assenting;
and in treating of our impulses he says that we must be vigilant in
restraining them, that they may act with proper reservation, with
public spirit, with due sense of proportion; also that we should
refrain utterly from sensual passion; and not be restive in matters
where we have no control.

38. The contention is not about any chance matter, said he, but as to
whether we are insane or sane.

39. What do you desire? says Socrates. To have the souls of rational
beings or of irrational? Rational. Rational of what kind, virtuous or
vicious? Virtuous. Why then do you not seek after such souls? Because
we have them already. Why then do you fight and stand at variance?

                      END OF THE ELEVENTH BOOK.

                              BOOK XII.

1. All that you desire to compass by devious means is yours already,
if you will but freely take it. That is to say, if you will leave
behind you all that is past, commit the future to Providence, and
regulate the present in piety and justice. In piety that you may love
your appointed lot; for Nature gave it to you and you to it. In
justice, that you may speak the truth with-out constraint or guile;
that you may do what is lawful and proper; that you may not be
hindered by the wickedness of others, or by their opinion, or their
talk, or by any sensation of this poor surrounding body, for the part
concerned may look to that. If then, now that you are near your exit,
setting behind you all other things, you will hold alone in reverence
your ruling part, the spirit divine within you; if you will cease to
dread the end of life, but rather fear to miss the beginning of life
according to Nature, you will be a man, worthy of the ordered Universe
that produced you; you will cease to be a stranger in your own
country, gaping in wonder at every daily happening, caught up by this
trifle or by that.

2. God beholds all souls bare and stripped of these corporeal vessels,
husk, and refuse. By his intelligence alone he touches that only which
has been instilled by him and has emanated from himself. If you would
but inure yourself to do the like, you would be eased of many a
torment. For he who regards not the surrounding flesh will not waste
his leisure in thinking about vesture, house, or fame, or other mere
external furniture or accoutrement.

3. Three parts there are of which you are compact; body, soul,
intelligence. Of these the two first are yours in so far as they must
have your care; the third only is properly your own. And if you will
cast away from yourself, that is from your mind, all that others do or
say, all that you yourself have done or said, all your fears for the
future, all the uncontrollable accompaniments of the body that
envelops you and of its congenital soul, and all that is whirled in
the besieging vortex that races without, so that your intellectual
power, made pure, and set above the accidents of fate, may live its
own life in freedom, just, resigned, veracious; if, I repeat, you cast
out from your soul all comes of excessive attachment either to the
past or to the future, then you will become in the words of
Empedocles,

    A faultless sphere rejoiced in endless rest.

You will study to live the only life there is to live, to wit the
present; and you will be able, till death shall come, to spend what
remains of life in noble tranquillity, at peace with the spirit
within.

4. I have wondered often how it comes that, while every man loves
himself beyond all others, yet he holds his own opinion of himself in
less esteem than the opinion of others. Yet, if a God or some wise
teacher came and ordered a man to conceive and design nothing which he
would not utter the moment it occurred to him, he would not abide the
ordeal for a single day. Thus we stand in greater awe of our
neighbours' opinion of us than we do of our own.

5. How can it be that the Gods, who have ordered all things well for
man's advantage, overlooked one thing only, to wit that some of the
best of mankind, who have held the closest relations with things
divine, and by pious works and holy ministry become intimate with the
Divinity, once dead, should arise no more, but be altogether
extinguished? If this be truly so, be well assured that, if it ought
to have been otherwise they would have made it otherwise. Had it been
right it would have been practicable; and had it been according to
Nature, Nature would have effected it. From its not being so, if it
really be not so, be persuaded that it ought not to have been. You see
that, in debating this matter, you are pleading a point of justice
with the Gods. Now we would not thus plead with the Gods were they not
perfectly good and just. And, if they are so, they have left nothing
unjustly and unreasonably neglected in their administration.

6. Essay even tasks that you despair of executing. The left hand,
which in other things is of little value for want of use, yet holds
the bridle more firmly than the right, for in this it has practice.

7. Consider how death ought to find you, both as to body and as to
soul. Think of the shortness of life, of the eternities before and
after, and of the infirmity of all material things.

8. Contemplate the fundamental causes stripped of disguises. Think
what pain is, what pleasure is, what death, and what fame. Consider
how many are themselves the causes of all the disquiet that they
suffer; how no man may be hindered by another; how all is matter of
opinion.

9. In the use of principles we should be like the pugilist rather than
the swordsman. For when the latter drops the sword which he uses he is
undone. But the former has his hand always by him and needs but to
wield it.

10. Consider well the nature of things, distinguishing between matter,
cause, and purpose.

11. What a glorious power is given to man, never to do any action of
which God will not approve, and to welcome whatever God appoints for
him!

12. As to what happens in the course of nature, the Gods are not to be
blamed. They never do wrong, willingly or unwillingly. Neither are men
to be blamed, for they do no wrong willingly. There is therefore none
to blame.

13. How ridiculous, and how like a foreigner, is he who is surprised
at anything which happens in life!

14. There is either a fatal necessity, an unalterable order, or a
placable Providence, or a blind confusion without a governor. If there
be an unalterable necessity, why strive against it? If there be a
Providence admitting of propitiation, make yourself worthy of the
divine aid. If there be an ungoverned confusion, be comforted; seeing
that in this tempest you have within yourself a guiding
intelligence. And, if the wave should carry you away, let it carry
away the carcase and the animal life, for the intellectual part of you
it will not carry away.

15. If the light of a lamp shine and lose not its radiance until it be
extinguished, shall truth, justice, and temperance be extinguished in
you before your own extinction.

16. When you have the impression that a man has sinned, say to
yourself: "How do I know that this is sin?" And, if he has sinned,
consider that he stands self-condemned: and thus, as it were, has torn
his own face.

He that would wish the wicked not to sin is like one who would have
the fig tree not have juice in its figs, would have infants not cry,
horses not neigh, and other inevitable things not happen. What shall
the wicked man do, having a wicked disposition? If you are so keen,
cure it.

17. If a thing be not becoming, do it not; if not true, say it not.

18. Endeavour always to see in everything what it is that causes your
impression; and unfold it by distinguishing the cause, the matter, the
relation to other things, and the period within which it must cease to
exist.

19. Perceive at last that there is within you something better and
more divine than the immediate cause of your sensations of pleasure
and pain; something, in short, beyond the strings which move the
puppet. What is now my thought? Is it fear? Suspicion? Lust? Or any
such passion?

20. In the first place, let nothing be done at random or without an
object. In the second let your object never be other than the common
good.

21. Yet a little, and you shall be no more; nor shall any of these
things remain which you now behold, nor any of those who are now
living. It is the nature of all things to change, to turn, and to
corrupt; in order that other things may, in their course, spring out
of them.

22. Reflect that everything is matter of opinion; and opinion rests
with yourself, suppress then your opinion, what time you will, and
like one who has doubled the cape and reached the bay, you will have
calm and stillness everywhere, never a wave.

23. Any one natural operation, ending at its proper time, suffers no
ill by ceasing, nor does the agent therein suffer any ill by its thus
ceasing. In like manner, as to the whole series of actions which is
life, if it ends in its season it suffers no ill by ceasing, nor is he
who thus completes his series, in any evil case. The season and the
term are assigned by Nature; sometimes even by your own nature, as in
old age; but always by the nature of the whole, by the interchange of
whose parts the Universe still remains fresh and in its bloom. Now,
that is always good and seasonable which is advantageous to the nature
of the whole. Wherefore the ceasing of life cannot be evil to the
individual. There is no turpitude in it, since it is beyond our power,
and contains nothing contrary to the common advantage. Nay, it is
good, since it is seasonable and advantageous to the whole, and,
congruent with the order of the Universe. Thus, too, he is led by God
who goes the same way with God, and that by like inclination.

24. Have these three thoughts always at hand: First, as to your
action, do nothing inconsiderately, or otherwise than justice herself
would have acted. As for external events, they either happen by chance
or by providence; now, no man should quarrel with chance or censure
providence. Second, examine what each thing is, from its seed to its
quickening; and from its quickening to its death; of what materials it
is composed, and into what it will be resolved. Third, reflect that
could you be raised on high, and from thence behold all human affairs,
you would discern their great variety, conscious at the same time of
the crowds of serial and etherial inhabitants around us; but were you
so raised ever so often, you would always see the same things, all
uniform and of brief duration. Can we set our pride on such matters?

25. "Cast away opinion, and you are saved." Who then hinders you from
casting it away?

26. When you fret at anything, you have forgotten that all happens in
accordance with the nature of the Universe, and that the wrong done
was another's. This, too, that whatever happens has happened, and will
happen, and is now happening everywhere. You have also forgotten how
great is the bond between any man and all the human race, a bond not
of blood and seed, but of common intelligence. You have forgotten that
the intelligence of every man is divine, and an efflux from God; also
that no man is proprietor of anything: his children, his body, his
very life are given of God. You have forgotten, too, that everything is
matter of opinion; and that it is the present moment only that one can
live or lose.

27. Bring to frequent recollection those who have grieved about
anything overmuch, those who have been pre-eminent in the extreme of
glory or misfortune, in feuds or other circumstances of fate. Then
stop and ask, Where are they all now? Smoke and ashes, and an old
tale; or perhaps not even a tale. Pass them all in review: Fabius
Catullinus in the country, Lucius Lupus in his gardens, Stertinius at
Baiae, Tiberius at Capreae, Velius Rufus, and, in fine, all eminence
attended with the high regard of men. How cheap is all that is so
eagerly pursued? And how much better does it become a philosopher to
show himself, in the part of the material world allotted to him, just,
temperate, and obedient to the Gods; and this with simplicity; for
most intolerable of all is the pride of false humility.

28. To those who ask, "Where have you seen the Gods, and how assured
yourself of their existence, that you worship them?" make this reply:
First, they are visible, even to the eye. Again, my own soul I cannot
see, and yet I reverence it. Thus, too, as regards the Gods, I
continually feel their power; and so I know that they exist, and I
worship them.

29. The safety of life is to see the whole nature of everything, and
to discern the matter and the form of its constitution; also to do
justice with all your heart, and to speak the truth. What remains but
to enjoy life, adding one good to an another, so as not to lose the
smallest interval?

30. There is but one light of the sun, although it be scattered upon
walls and hills, and a myriad other objects. There is but one common
substance, although it be divided among ten thousand bodies having as
many different qualities.  There is but one soul, though it be
distributed among countless different natures and individual
forms. There is but one intelligent spirit, though it may seem to be
divided. The other parts of these individuals of which we have spoken,
such as breath and matter, are void of perception and of mutual
affection; yet even they are held together by the intelligent spirit
and gravitate together. But intelligence has a special tendency to its
kind, and unites therewith, and the community of feeling is not
broken.

31. What do you desire? To live on? Or is it to feel or to desire? To
grow and to decay again? To speak or think? Which of all these seems
worthy to be desired? And, if each and all of them is despicable,
proceed to the last that remains, to follow reason and God. Now, it is
repugnant to reverence for reason and for God to grieve at the loss by
death of these other despicable things.

32. How small a part of the boundless immensity of the ages is
allotted to each of us, and presently that will vanish in eternity!
How little is ours of the universal substance; how little of the
universal spirit!  On what a little clod of the whole earth do we
creep! Considering all this, reckon nothing great except to act as
your nature leads you, and to endure what universal Nature brings to
pass.

33. How is it with your ruling part? On this all depends. All other
things, within or without our control, are but corpses, dust, and
smoke.

34. This most of all must rouse you to despise death: That even those
who held pleasure to be good and pain to be evil nevertheless despised
it.

35. To him who holds that alone to be good which comes in proper
season, who cares not whether he has acted oftener or less often
according to right reason; to whom it makes no difference whether he
behold the universe for a longer time or a shorter--for this man
death also has no terror.

36. You have lived, O man, as a citizen of this great city; of what
consequence to you whether for five years or for three? What comes by
law is fair to all. Where then is the calamity, if you are sent out of
the city, by no tyrant or unjust judge, but Nature herself who at
first introduced you, just as the praetor who engaged the actor again
dismisses him from the stage? "But," say you, "I have not spoken my
five acts, but only three." True, but in life three acts make up the
play. For he sets the end who was responsible for its composition at
the first, and for its present dissolution. You are responsible for
neither. Depart then graciously; for he who dismisses you is gracious.

                               THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Meditations of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, by Marcus Aurelius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDITATIONS OF MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS ***

***** This file should be named 55317.txt or 55317.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/3/1/55317/

Produced by E.H.N.
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ecce Homo, by Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Ecce Homo
       Complete Works, Volume Seventeen

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Editor: Oscar Levy

Translator: Anthony M. Ludovici
            Paul V. Cohn

Release Date: May 30, 2016 [EBook #52190]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ECCE HOMO ***




Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Hathi Trust.)





ECCE HOMO

(_NIETZSCHES AUTOBIOGRAPHY_)

BY

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE


TRANSLATED BY

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI


POETRY RENDERED BY

PAUL V. COHN -- FRANCIS BICKLEY

HERMAN SCHEFFAUER -- DR. G. T. WRENCH

HYMN TO LIFE (_composed by F. NIETZSCHE_)


The Complete Works of Friedrich Nietzsche

The First Complete and Authorised English Translation

Edited by Dr Oscar Levy

Volume Seventeen

T.N. FOULIS

13 & 15 FREDERICK STREET

EDINBURGH: AND LONDON

1911



CONTENTS

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION
AUTHOR'S PREFACE
WHY I AM SO WISE
WHY I AM SO CLEVER
WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS
The Birth of Tragedy
Thoughts out of Season
Human, All-too-Human
The Dawn of Day
The Joyful Wisdom
Thus spake Zarathustra
Beyond Good and Evil
The Genealogy of Morals
The Twilight of the Idols
The Case of Wagner
WHY I AM A FATALITY
EDITORIAL NOTE TO POETRY
POETRY--
Songs, Epigrams, etc.
Dionysus-Dithyrambs
Fragments of Dionysus-Dithyrambs
HYMN TO LIFE, COMPOSED BY F. NIETZSCHE




TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION


_Ecce Homo_ is the last prose work that Nietzsche wrote. It is true
that the pamphlet _Nietzsche contra Wagner_ was prepared a month
later than the Autobiography; but we cannot consider this pamphlet as
anything more than a compilation, seeing that it consists entirely of
aphorisms drawn from such previous works as _Joyful Wisdom, Beyond
Good and Evil, The Genealogy of Morals,_ etc. Coming at the end of a
year in which he had produced the _Case of Wagner, The Twilight of the
Idols,_ and _The Antichrist, Ecce Homo_ is not only a coping-stone
worthy of the wonderful creations of that year, but also a fitting
conclusion to his whole life, in the form of a grand summing up of his
character as a man, his purpose as a reformer, and his achievement
as a thinker. As if half conscious of his approaching spiritual end,
Nietzsche here bids his friends farewell, just in the manner in which,
in the _Twilight of the Idols_ (Aph. 36, Part ix.), he declares that
every one should be able to take leave of his circle of relatives and
intimates when his time seems to have come--that is to say, while he
is still _himself_ while he still knows what he is about, and is able
to measure his own life and life in general, and speak of both in a
manner which is not vouchsafed to the groaning invalid, to the man
lying on his back, decrepit and exhausted, or to the moribund victim
of some wasting disease. Nietzsche's spiritual death, like his whole
life, was in singular harmony with his doctrine: he died suddenly
and proudly,--sword in hand. War, which he--and he alone among all
the philosophers of Christendom--had praised so whole-heartedly, at
last struck him down in the full vigour of his manhood, and left him
a victim on the battlefield--the terrible battlefield of thought, on
which there is no quarter, and for which no Geneva Convention has yet
been established or even thought of.

To those who know Nietzsche's life-work, no apology will be needed
for the form and content of this wonderful work. They will know, at
least, that a man either is, or is not, aware of his significance and
of the significance of what he has accomplished, and that if he is
aware of it, then self-realisation, even of the kind which we find
in these pages, is neither morbid nor suspicious, but necessary and
inevitable. Such chapter headings as "Why I am so Wise," "Why I am a
Fatality," "Why I write such Excellent Books,"--however much they may
have disturbed the equanimity, and "objectivity" in particular, of
certain Nietzsche biographers, can be regarded as pathological only
in a democratic age in which people have lost all sense of graduation
and rank and in which the virtues of modesty and humility have to be
preached far and wide as a corrective against the vulgar pretensions of
thousands of wretched nobodies. For little people can be endured only
as modest citizens; or humble Christians. If, however, they demand a
like modesty on the part of the truly great; if they raise their voices
against Nietzsche's lack of the very virtue they so abundantly possess
or pretend to possess, it is time to remind them of Goethe's famous
remark: "_Nur Lumpe sind bescheiden_" (Only nobodies are ever modest).

It took Nietzsche barely three weeks to write this story of his life.
Begun on the 15 th of October 1888, his four-and-fourtieth birthday,
it was finished on the 4th of November of the same year, and, but
for a few trifling modifications and additions, is just as Nietzsche
left it. It was not published in Germany until the year 1908, eight
years after Nietzsche's death. In a letter dated the 27th of December
1888, addressed to the musical composer Fuchs, the author declares
the object of the work to be to dispose of all discussion, doubt, and
inquiry concerning his own personality, in order to leave the public
mind free to consider merely "the things for the sake of which he
existed" ("_die Dinge, derentwegen ich da bin_"). And, true to his
intention, Nietzsche's honesty in these pages is certainly one of
the most remarkable features about them. From the first chapter, in
which he frankly acknowledges the decadent elements within him, to
the last page, whereon he characterises his mission, his life-task,
and his achievement, by means of the one symbol, _Dionysus_ versus
_Christ,_--everything comes straight from the shoulder, without
hesitation, without fear of consequences, and, above all, without
concealment. Only in one place does he appear to conceal something, and
then he actually leads one to understand that he is doing so. It is in
regard to Wagner, the greatest friend of his life. "Who doubts," he
says, "that I, old artillery-man that I am, would be able if I liked to
point my heavy guns at Wagner?"--But he adds: "Everything decisive in
this question I kept to myself--I have loved Wagner" (p. 122).

To point, as many have done, to the proximity of all Nietzsche's autumn
work of the year 1888 to his breakdown at the beginning of 1889, and
to argue that in all its main features it foretells the catastrophe
that is imminent, seems a little too plausible, a little too obvious
and simple to require refutation. That Nietzsche really was in a state
which in medicine is known as _euphoria_--that is to say, that state
of highest well-being and capacity which often precedes a complete
breakdown, cannot, I suppose, be questioned; for his style, his
penetrating vision, and his vigour, reach their zenith in the works
written in this autumn of 1888; but the contention that the matter, the
substance, of these works reveals any signs whatsoever of waning mental
health, or, as a certain French biographer has it, of an inability to
"hold himself and his judgments in check," is best contradicted by
the internal evidence itself. To take just a few examples at random,
examine the cold and calculating tone of self-analysis in Chapter I. of
the present work; consider the reserve and the restraint with which the
idea in Aphorism 7 of that chapter is worked out,--not to speak of the
restraint and self-mastery in the idea itself, namely:--

"To be one's enemy's equal--this is the first condition of an
honourable duel. Where one despises one cannot wage war. Where one
commands, where one sees something beneath one, one ought not to wage
war. My war tactics can be reduced to four principles: First, I attack
only things that are triumphant--if necessary I wait until they become
triumphant. Secondly, I attack only those things against which I find
no allies, against which I stand alone--against which I compromise
nobody but myself.... Thirdly, I never make personal attacks--I use a
personality merely as a magnifying-glass, by means of which I render a
general, but elusive and scarcely noticeable evil, more apparent....
Fourthly, I attack only those things from which all personal
differences are excluded, in which any such thing as a background of
disagreeable experiences is lacking."

And now notice the gentleness with which, in Chapter II., Wagner--the
supposed mortal enemy, the supposed envied rival to Nietzsche--is
treated. Are these the words and the thoughts of a man who Has lost, or
who is losing control?

And even if we confine ourselves simply to the substance of this work
and put the question--Is it a new Nietzsche or the old Nietzsche that
we find in these pages? Is it the old countenance with which we are
familiar, or are the features distorted, awry, disfigured? What will
the answer be? Obviously there is no new or even deformed Nietzsche
here, because he is still faithful to the position which he assumed
in _Thus spake Zarathustra,_ five years previously, and is perfectly
conscious of this fidelity (see p. 141); neither can he be even on the
verge of any marked change, because the whole of the third chapter,
in which he reviews his life-work, is simply a reiteration and a
confirmation of his old points of view, which are here made all the
more telling by additional arguments suggested, no doubt, by maturer
thought. In fact, if anything at all is new in this work, it is its
cool certainty, its severe deliberateness, and its extraordinarily
incisive vision, as shown, for instance, in the summing up of the
genuine import of the third and fourth essays in the _Thoughts out of
Season_ (pp. 75-76, 80, 81, 82), a summing up which a most critical
analysis of the essays in question can but verify. Romanticism,
idealism, Christianity, are still scorned and despised; another
outlook, a nobler, braver, and more earthly outlook, is still upheld
and revered; the great yea to life, including all that it contains
that is terrible and questionable, is still pronounced in the teeth of
pessimists, nihilists, anarchists, Christians, and other decadents; and
Germany, "Europe's flatland," is still subjected to the most relentless
criticism. If there are any signs of change, besides those of mere
growth, in this work, they certainly succeed in eluding the most
careful search, undertaken with a full knowledge of Nietzsche's former
opinions, and it would be interesting to know precisely where they are
found by those writers whom the titles of the chapters, alone, seem so
radically to have perturbed.

But the most striking thing of all, the miracle, so to speak, of this
autobiography, is the absence from it of that loathing, that suggestion
of surfeit, with which a life such as the one Nietzsche had led, would
have filled any other man even of power approximate to his own. This
anchorite, who, in the last years of his life as a healthy human being,
suffered the experience of seeing even his oldest friends, including
Rhode, show the most complete indifference to his lot, this wrestler
with Fate, for whom recognition, in the persons of Brandes, Taine, and
Strindberg, had come all too late, and whom even support, sympathy, and
help, arriving as it did at last, through Deussen and from Madame de
Salis Marschlins, could no longer cheer or comfort,--this was the man
who was able notwithstanding to inscribe the device _amor fati_ upon
his shield on the very eve of his final collapse as a victim of the
unspeakable suffering he had endured.

And this final collapse might easily have been foreseen. Nietzsche's
sensorium, as his autobiography proves, was probably the most delicate
instrument ever possessed by a human being; and with this fragile
structure--the prerequisite, by the bye, of all genius,--his terrible
will compelled him to confront the most profound and most recondite
problems. We happen to know from another artist and profound thinker,
Benjamin Disraeli, who himself had experienced a dangerous breakdown,
what the consequences precisely are of indulging in excessive activity
in the sphere of the spirit, more particularly when that spirit is
highly organised. Disraeli says in _Contarini Fleming_ (Part iv. chap.
v.):--

    "I have sometimes half believed, although the suspicion is
    mortifying, that there is only one step between his state
    who deeply indulges in imaginative meditation, and insanity;
    for I well remember that at this period of my life, when
    I indulged in meditation to a degree that would now be
    impossible, and I hope unnecessary, my senses sometimes
    appeared to be wandering."

And artists are the proper judges of artists,--not Oxford Dons, like
Dr. Schiller, who, in his imprudent attempt at dealing with something
for which his pragmatic hands are not sufficiently delicate, eagerly
av-ails himself of popular help in his article on Nietzsche in the
eleventh edition of the _Encyclopedia Britannica,_ and implies the
hackneyed and wholly exploded belief that Nietzsche's philosophy is
madness in the making. As German philosophies, however, are said to
go to Oxford only when they die, we may, perhaps, conclude from this
want of appreciation in that quarter, how very much alive Nietzsche's
doctrine still is.

Not that Nietzsche went mad so soon, but that he went mad so late is
the wonder of wonders. Considering the extraordinary amount of work
he did, the great task of the transvaluation of all values, which he
actually accomplished, and the fact that he endured such long years
of solitude, which to him, the sensitive artist to whom friends were
everything, must have been a terrible hardship, we can only wonder at
his great health, and can well believe his sister's account of the
phenomenal longevity and bodily vigour of his ancestors.

No one, however, who is initiated, no one who reads this work with
understanding, will be in need of this introductory note of mine; for,
to all who know, these pages must speak for themselves. We are no
longer in the nineteenth century. We have learned many things since
then, and if caution is only one of these things, at least it will
prevent us from judging a book such as this one, with all its apparent
pontifical pride and surging self-reliance, with undue haste, or with
that arrogant assurance with which the ignorance of "the humble" and
"the modest" has always confronted everything truly great.

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.




PREFACE


1

As it is my intention within a very short time to confront my
fellow-men with the very greatest demand that has ever yet been made
upon them, it seems to me _above_ all necessary to declare here who
and what I am. As a matter of fact, this ought to be pretty well
known already, for I have not "held my tongue" about myself. But
the disparity which obtains between the greatness of my task and the
smallness of my contemporaries, is revealed by the fact that people
have neither heard me nor yet seen me. I live on my own self-made
credit, and it is probably only a prejudice to suppose that I am alive
at all. I do but require to speak to any one of the scholars who come
to the Ober-Engadine in the summer in order to convince myself that I
am _not_ alive.... Under these circumstances, it is a duty--and one
against which my customary reserve, and to a still greater degree the
pride of my instincts, rebel--to say: _Listen! for I am such and such a
person. For Heaven's sake do not confound me with any one else!_



2

I am, for instance, in no wise a bogey man, or moral monster. On the
contrary, I am the very opposite in nature to the kind of man that
has been honoured hitherto as virtuous. Between ourselves, it seems
to me that this is precisely a matter on which I may feel proud. I
am a disciple of the philosopher Dionysus, and I would prefer to be
even a satyr than a saint. But just read this book! Maybe I have here
succeeded in expressing this contrast in a cheerful and at the same
time sympathetic manner--maybe this is the only purpose of the present
work.

The very last thing I should promise to accomplish would be to
"improve" mankind. I do not set up any new idols; may old idols only
learn what it costs to have legs of clay. To overthrow idols (idols
is the name I give to all ideals) is much more like my business. In
proportion as an ideal world has been falsely assumed, reality has been
robbed of its value, its meaning, and its truthfulness.... The "true
world" and the "apparent world"--in plain English, the fictitious world
and reality.... Hitherto the _lie_ of the ideal has been the curse of
reality; by means of it the very source of mankind's instincts has
become mendacious and false; so much so that those values have come to
be worshipped which are the exact _opposite_ of the ones which would
ensure man's prosperity, his future, and his great right to a future.



3

He who knows how to breathe in the air of my writings is conscious
that it is the air of the heights, that it is bracing. A man must be
built for it, otherwise the chances are that it will chill him. The
ice is near, the loneliness is terrible--but how serenely everything
lies in the sunshine! how freely one can breathe! how much, one feels,
lies beneath one! Philosophy, as I have understood it hitherto, is
a voluntary retirement into regions of ice and mountain-peaks--the
seeking--out of everything strange and questionable in existence,
everything upon which, hitherto, morality has set its ban. Through
long experience, derived from such wanderings in forbidden country, I
acquired an opinion very different from that which may seem generally
desirable, of the causes which hitherto have led to men's moralising
and idealising. The secret history of philosophers, the psychology of
their great names, was revealed to me. How much truth can a certain
mind endure; how much truth can it dare?--these questions became for
me ever more and more the actual test of values. Error (the belief in
the ideal) is not blindness; error is cowardice.... Every conquest,
every step forward in knowledge, is the outcome of courage, of hardness
towards one's self, of cleanliness towards one's self. I do not refute
ideals; all I do is to draw on my gloves in their presence.... _Nitimur
in vetitum;_ with this device my philosophy will one day be victorious;
for that which has hitherto been most stringently forbidden is, without
exception, Truth.



4

In my lifework, my _Zarathustra_ holds a place apart. With it, I gave
my fellow-men the greatest gift that has ever been bestowed upon them.
This book, the voice of which speaks out across the ages, is not only
the loftiest book on earth, literally the book of mountain air,--the
whole phenomenon, mankind, lies at an incalculable distance beneath
it,--but it is also the deepest book, born of the inmost abundance of
truth; an inexhaustible well, into which no pitcher can be lowered
without coming up again laden with gold and with goodness. Here it is
not a "prophet" who speaks, one of those gruesome hybrids of sickness
and Will to Power, whom men call founders of religions. If a man would
not do a sad wrong to his wisdom, he must, above all give proper
heed to the tones--the halcyonic tones--that fall from the lips of
Zarathustra:--

"The most silent words are harbingers of the storm; thoughts that come
on dove's feet lead the world.

"The figs fall from the trees; they are good and sweet, and, when they
fall, their red skins are rent.

"A north wind am I unto ripe figs.

"Thus, like figs, do these precepts drop down to you, my friends; now
drink their juice and their sweet pulp.

"It is autumn all around, and clear sky, and afternoon."

No fanatic speaks to you here; this is not a "sermon"; no faith is
demanded in these pages. From out an infinite treasure of light and
well of joy, drop by drop, my words fall out--a slow and gentle gait
is the cadence of these discourses. Such things can reach only the
most elect; it is a rare privilege to be a listener here; not every?
one who likes can have ears to hear Zarathustra. I Is not Zarathustra,
because of these things, a _seducer?_ ... But what, indeed, does he
himself say, when for the first time he goes back to his solitude? Just
the reverse of that which any "Sage," "Saint," "Saviour of the world,"
and other decadent would say.... Not only his words, but he himself is
other than they.

"Alone do I now go, my disciples! Get ye also hence, and alone! Thus
would I have it.

"Verily, I beseech you: take your leave of me and arm yourselves
against Zarathustra! And better still, be ashamed of him! Maybe he hath
deceived you.

"The knight of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies, but
also to hate his friends.

"The man who remaineth a pupil requiteth his teacher but ill. And why
would ye not pluck at my wreath?

"Ye honour me; but what if your reverence should one day break down?
Take heed, lest a statue crush you.

"Ye say ye believe in Zarathustra? But of; what account is Zarathustra?
Ye are my believers: but of what account are all believers?

"Ye had not yet sought yourselves when ye found me. Thus do all
believers; therefore is all believing worth so little.

"Now I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when ye have all
denied me will I come back unto you."

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.





On this perfect day, when everything is ripening, and not only the
grapes are getting brown, a ray of sunshine has fallen on my life: I
looked behind me, I looked before me, and never have I seen so many
good things all at once. Not in vain have I buried my four-and-fortieth
year to-day; I had the _right_ to bury it--that in it which still
had life, has been saved and is immortal. The first book of the
_Transvaluation of all Values, The Songs of Zarathustra, The Twilight
of the Idols,_ my attempt, to philosophise with the hammer--all these
things are the gift of this year, and even of its last quarter. _How
could I help being thankful to the whole of my life?_

That is why I am now going to tell myself the story of my life.




ECCE HOMO


HOW ONE BECOMES WHAT ONE IS




WHY I AM SO WISE



1


The happiness of my existence, its unique character perhaps, consists
in its fatefulness: to speak in a riddle, as my own father I am already
dead, as my own mother I still live and grow old. This double origin,
taken as it were from the highest and lowest rungs of the ladder of
life, at once a decadent and a beginning, this, if anything, explains
that neutrality, that freedom from partisanship in regard to the
general problem of existence, which perhaps distinguishes me. To the
first indications of ascending or of descending life my nostrils are
more sensitive than those of any man that has yet lived. In this domain
I am a master to my backbone--I know both sides, for I am both sides.
My father died in his six-and-thirtieth year: he was delicate, lovable,
and morbid, like one who is preordained to pay simply a flying visit--a
gracious reminder of life rather than life itself. In the same year
that his life declined mine also declined: in my six-and-thirtieth year
I reached the lowest point in my vitality,--I still lived, but my eyes
could distinguish nothing that lay three paces away from me. At that
time--it was the year 1879--I resigned my professorship at Bâle, lived
through the summer like a shadow in St. Moritz, and spent the following
winter, the most sunless of my life, like a shadow in Naumburg. This
was my lowest ebb. During this period I wrote _The Wanderer and His
Shadow._ Without a doubt I was conversant with shadows then. The winter
that followed, my first winter in Genoa, brought forth that sweetness
and spirituality which is almost inseparable from extreme poverty
of blood and muscle, in the shape of _The Dawn of Day,_ The perfect
lucidity and cheerfulness, the intellectual exuberance even, that this
work reflects, coincides, in my case, not only with the most profound
physiological weakness, but also with an excess of suffering. In the
midst of the agony of a headache which lasted three days, accompanied
by violent nausea, I was possessed of most singular dialectical
clearness, and in absolutely cold blood I then thought out things, for
which, in my more healthy moments, I am not enough of a climber, not
sufficiently subtle, not sufficiently cold. My readers perhaps know
to what extent I consider dialectic a symptom of decadence, as, for
instance, in the most famous of all cases--the case of Socrates. All
the morbid disturbances of the intellect, even that semi-stupor which
accompanies fever, have, unto this day, remained completely unknown to
me; and for my first information concerning their nature and frequency,
I was obliged to have recourse to the learned works which have been
compiled on the subject. My circulation is slow. No one has ever been
able to detect fever in me. A doctor who treated me for some time as
a nerve patient finally declared: "No! there is nothing wrong with
your nerves, it is simply I who am nervous." It has been absolutely
impossible to ascertain any local degeneration in me, nor any organic
stomach trouble, however much I may have suffered from profound
weakness of the gastric system as the result of general exhaustion.
Even my eye trouble, which sometimes approached so parlously near
to blindness, was only an effect and not a cause; for, whenever my
general vital condition improved, my power of vision also increased.
Having admitted all this, do I need to say that I am experienced in
questions of decadence? I know them inside and out. Even that filigree
art of prehension and comprehension in general, that feeling for
delicate shades of difference, that psychology of "seeing through brick
walls," and whatever else I may be able to do, was first learnt then,
and is the specific gift of that period during which everything in
me was subtilised,--observation itself, together with all the organs
of observation. To look upon healthier concepts and values from the
standpoint of the sick, and conversely to look down upon the secret
work of the instincts of decadence from the standpoint of him who is
laden and self-reliant with the richness of life--this has been my
longest exercise, my principal experience. If in anything at all, it
was in this that I became a master. To-day my hand knows the trick, I
now have the knack of reversing perspectives: the first reason perhaps
why a _Transvaluation of all Values_ has been possible to me alone.



2


For, apart from the fact that I am a decadent, I am also the reverse of
such a creature. Among other things my proof of this is, that I always
instinctively select the proper remedy when my spiritual or bodily
health is low; whereas the decadent, as such, invariably chooses those
remedies which are bad for him. As a whole I was sound, but in certain
details I was a decadent. That energy with which I sentenced myself
to absolute solitude, and to a severance from all those conditions in
life to which I had grown accustomed; my discipline of myself, and my
refusal to allow myself to be pampered, to be tended hand and foot, and
to be doctored--all this betrays the absolute certainty of my instincts
respecting what at that time was most needful to me. I placed myself
in my own hands, I restored myself to health: the first condition of
success in such an undertaking, as every physiologist will admit, is
that at bottom a man should be sound. An intrinsically morbid nature
cannot become healthy. On the other hand, to an intrinsically sound
nature, illness may even constitute a powerful stimulus to life, to
a surplus of life. It is in this light that I now regard the long
period of illness that I endured: it seemed as if I had discovered
life afresh, my own self included. I tasted all good things and even
trifles in a way in which it was not easy for others to taste them--out
of my Will to Health and to Life I made my philosophy.... For this
should be thoroughly understood; it was during those years in which my
vitality reached its lowest point that I ceased from being a pessimist:
the instinct of self-recovery forbade my holding to a philosophy of
poverty and desperation. Now, by what signs are Nature's lucky strokes
recognised among men? They are recognised by the fact that any such
lucky stroke gladdens our senses; that he is carved from one integral
block, which is hard, sweet, and fragrant as well. He enjoys that only
which is good for him; his pleasure, his desire, ceases when the limits
of that which is good for him are overstepped. He divines remedies for
injuries; he knows how to turn serious accidents to his own advantage;
that which does not kill him makes him stronger. He instinctively
gathers his material from all he sees, hears, and experiences. He is a
selective principle; he rejects much. He is always in his own company,
whether his intercourse be with books, with men, or with natural
scenery; he honours the things he chooses, the things he acknowledges,
the things he trusts. He reacts slowly to all kinds of stimuli, with
that tardiness which long caution and deliberate pride have bred in
him--he tests the approaching stimulus; he would not dream of meeting
it half-way. He believes neither in "ill-luck" nor "guilt"; he can
digest himself and others; he knows how to forget--he is strong enough
to make everything turn to his own advantage.

Lo then! I am the very reverse of a decadent, for he whom I have just
described is none other than myself.



3


This double thread of experiences, this means of access to two worlds
that seem so far asunder, finds in every detail its counterpart in my
own nature--I am my own complement: I have a "second" sight, as well
as a first. And perhaps I also have a third sight. By the very nature
of my origin I was allowed an outlook beyond all merely local, merely
national and limited horizons; it required no effort on my part to be
a "good European." On the other hand, I am perhaps more German than
modern Germans--mere Imperial Germans--can hope to be,--I, the last
anti-political German. Be this as it may, my ancestors were Polish
noblemen: it is owing to them that I have so much race instinct in my
blood--who knows? perhaps even the _liberum veto_[1] When I think of
the number of times in my travels that I have been accosted as a Pole,
even by Poles themselves, and how seldom I have been taken for a German,
it seems to me as if I belonged to those only who have a sprinkling
of German in them. But my mother, Franziska Oehler, is at any rate
something very German; as is also my paternal grandmother, Erdmuthe
Krause. The latter spent the whole of her youth in good old Weimar,
not without coming into contact with Goethe's circle. Her brother,
Krause, the Professor of Theology in Königsberg, was called to the
post of General Superintendent at Weimar after Herder's death. It is
not unlikely that her mother, my great grandmother, is mentioned in
young Goethe's diary under the name of "Muthgen." She married twice,
and her second husband was Superintendent Nietzsche of Eilenburg.
In 1813, the year of the great war, when Napoleon with his general
staff entered Eilenburg on the 10th of October, she gave birth to a
son. As a daughter of Saxony she was a great admirer of Napoleon, and
maybe I am so still. My father, born in 1813, died in 1849. Previous
to taking over the pastorship of the parish of Röcken, not far from
Lützen, he lived for some years at the Castle of Altenburg, where he
had charge of the education of the four princesses. His pupils are the
Queen of Hanover, the Grand-Duchess Constantine, the Grand-Duchess of
Oldenburg, and the Princess Theresa of Saxe-Altenburg. He was full of
loyal respect for the Prussian King, Frederick William the Fourth, from
whom he obtained his living at Röcken; the events of 1848 saddened him
extremely. As I was born on the 15 th of October, the birthday of the
king above mentioned, I naturally received the Hohenzollern names of
Frederick William. There was at all events one advantage in the choice
of this day: my birthday throughout the whole of my childhood was a day
of public rejoicing. I regard it as a great privilege to have had such
a father: it even seems to me that this embraces all that I can claim
in the matter of privileges--life, the great yea to life, excepted.
What I owe to him above all is this, that I do not need any special
intention, but merely a little patience, in order involuntarily to
enter a world of higher and more delicate things. There I am at home,
there alone does my inmost passion become free. The fact that I had
to pay for this privilege almost with my life, certainly does not
make it a bad bargain. In order to understand even a little of _my
Zarathustra,_ perhaps a man must be situated and constituted very much
as I am myself--with one foot beyond the realm of the living.



4


I have never understood the art of arousing ill-feeling against
myself,--this is also something for which I have to thank my
incomparable father,--even when it seemed to me highly desirable
to do so. However un-Christian it may seem, I do not even bear any
ill-feeling towards myself. Turn my life about as you may, you will
find but seldom--perhaps indeed only once--any trace of some one's
having shown me ill-will. You might perhaps discover, however, too
many traces of _goodwill...._ My experiences even with those on whom
every other man has burnt his fingers, speak without exception in their
favour; I tame every bear, I can make even clowns behave decently.
During the seven years in which I taught Greek to the sixth form of
the College at Bâle, I never had occasion to administer a punishment;
the laziest youths were diligent in my class. The unexpected has
always found me equal to it; I must be unprepared in order to keep my
self-command. Whatever the instrument was, even if it were as out of
tune as the instrument "man" can possibly be,--it was only when I was
ill that I could not succeed in making it express something that was
worth hearing. And how often have I not been told by the "instruments"
themselves, that they had never before heard their voices express such
beautiful things.... This was said to me most delightfully perhaps by
that young fellow Heinrich von Stein, who died at such an unpardonably
early age, and who, after having considerately asked leave to do
so, once appeared in Sils-Maria for a three days' sojourn, telling
everybody there that it was _not_ for the Engadine that he had come.
This excellent person, who with all the impetuous simplicity of a
young Prussian nobleman, had waded deep into the swamp of Wagnerism
(and into that of Dübringism[2] into the bargain!), seemed almost
transformed during these three days by a hurricane of freedom, like one
who has been suddenly raised to his full height and given wings. Again
and again I said to him that this was all owing to the splendid air;
everybody felt the same,--one could not stand 6000 feet above Bayreuth
for nothing,--but he would not believe me.... Be this as it may, if
I have been the victim of many a small or even great offence, it was
not "will," and least of all ill-will that actuated the offenders; but
rather, as I have already suggested, it was goodwill, the cause of no
small amount of mischief in f my life, about which I had to complain.
_My_ experience gave me a right to feel suspicious in regard to all
so-called "unselfish" instincts, in regard to the whole of "neighbourly
love" which is ever ready and waiting with deeds or with advice. To
me it seems that these instincts are a sign of weakness, they are an
example of the inability to withstand a stimulus--it is only among
decadents that this _pity_ is called a virtue. What I reproach the
pitiful with is, that they are too ready to forget shame, reverence,
and the delicacy of feeling which knows how to keep at a distance; they
do not remember that this gushing pity stinks of the mob, and that it
is next of kin to bad manners--that pitiful hands may be thrust with
results fatally destructive into a great destiny, into a lonely and
wounded retirement, and into the privileges with which great guilt
endows one. The overcoming of pity I reckon among the noble virtues;
In the "Temptation of Zarathustra" I have imagined a case, in which a
great cry of distress reaches his ears, in which pity swoops down upon
him like a last sin, and would make him break faith with himself. To
remain one's own master in such circumstances, to keep the sublimity
of one's mission pure in such cases,--pure from the many ignoble and
more short-sighted impulses which come into play in so-called unselfish
actions,--this is the rub, the last test perhaps which a Zarathustra
has to undergo--the actual proof of his power.



5


In yet another respect I am no more than my father over again, and as
it were the continuation of his life after an all-too-early death.
Like every man who has never been able to meet his equal, and unto
whom the concept "retaliation" is just as incomprehensible as the
notion of "equal rights," I have forbidden myself the use of any sort
of measure of security or protection--and also, of course, of defence
and "justification"--in all cases in which I have been made the victim
either of trifling or even _very great_ foolishness. My form of
retaliation consists in this: as soon as possible to set a piece of
cleverness at the heels of an act of stupidity; by this means perhaps
it may still be possible to overtake it. To speak in a parable: I
dispatch a pot of jam in order to get rid of a bitter experience....
Let anybody only give me offence, I shall "retaliate," he can be quite
sure of that: before long I discover an opportunity of expressing my
thanks to the "offender" (among other things even for the offence)--or
of _asking_ him for something, which can be more courteous even than
giving. It also seems to me that the rudest word, the rudest letter,
is more good-natured, more straightforward, than silence. Those--who
keep silent are almost always lacking in subtlety and refinement of
heart; silence is an objection, to swallow a grievance must necessarily
produce a bad temper--it even upsets the stomach. All silent people
are dyspeptic. You perceive that I should not like to see rudeness
undervalued; it is by far the most _humane_ form of contradiction, and,
in the midst of modern effeminacy, it is one of our first virtues; If
one is sufficiently rich for it, it may even be a joy to be wrong. If
a god were to descend to this earth, he would have to do nothing but
wrong--to take _guilt_ not punishment, on one's shoulders, is the first
proof of divinity.



6


Freedom from resentment and the understanding of the nature of
resentment--who knows how very much after all I am indebted to my long
illness for these two things? The problem is not exactly simple: a
man must have experienced both through his strength and through his
weakness, If illness and weakness are to be charged with anything at
all, it is with the fact that when they prevail, the very instinct of
recovery, which is the instinct of defence and of war in man, becomes
decayed. He knows not how to get rid of anything, how to come to
terms with anything, and how to cast anything behind him. Everything
wounds him. People and things draw importunately near, all experiences
strike deep, memory is a gathering wound. To be ill is a sort of
resentment in itself. Against this resentment the invalid has only
one great remedy--I call it _Russian fatalism,_ that fatalism which
is free from revolt, and with which the Russian soldier, to whom a
campaign proves unbearable, ultimately lays himself down in the snow.
To accept nothing more, to undertake nothing more, to absorb nothing
more--to cease entirely from reacting.... The tremendous sagacity
of this fatalism, which does not always imply merely the courage for
death, but which in the most dangerous cases may actually constitute
a self-preservative measure, amounts to a reduction of activity in
the vital functions, the slackening down of which is like a sort of
will to hibernate. A few steps farther in this direction we find the
fakir, who will sleep for weeks in a tomb.... Owing to the fact that
one would be used up too quickly if one reacted, one no longer reacts
at all: this is the principle. And nothing on earth consumes a man
more quickly than the passion of resentment. Mortification, morbid
susceptibility, the inability to wreak revenge, the desire and thirst
for revenge, the concoction of every sort of poison--this is surely the
most injurious manner of reacting which could possibly be conceived by
exhausted men. It involves a rapid wasting away of nervous energy, an
abnormal increase of detrimental secretions, as, for instance, that
of bile into the stomach. To the sick man resentment ought to be more
strictly forbidden than anything else--it is _his_ special danger:
unfortunately, however, it is also his most natural propensity. This
was fully grasped by that profound physiologist Buddha. His "religion,"
which it would be better to call a system of hygiene, in order to avoid
confounding it with a creed so wretched as Christianity, depended
for its effect upon the triumph over resentment: to make the soul
free therefrom was considered the first step towards recovery. "Not
through hostility is hostility put to flight; through friendship does
hostility end": this stands at the beginning of Buddha's teaching--this
is not a precept of morality, but of physiology. Resentment born of
weakness is not more deleterious to anybody than it is to the weak
man himself--conversely, in the case of that man whose nature is
fundamentally a rich one, resentment is a superfluous feeling, a
feeling to remain master of which is almost a proof of riches. Those
of my readers who know the earnestness-with which my philosophy wages
war against the feelings of revenge and rancour, even to the extent of
attacking the doctrine of "free will" (my conflict with Christianity
is only a particular instance of it), will understand why I wish to
focus attention upon my own personal attitude and the certainty of
my practical instincts precisely in this matter. In my moments of
decadence I forbade myself the indulgence of the above feelings,
because they were harmful; as soon as my life recovered enough riches
and pride, however, I regarded them again as forbidden, but this time
because they were _beneath_ me. That "Russian fatalism" of which I have
spoken manifested itself in me in such a way that for years I held
tenaciously to almost insufferable conditions, places, habitations,
and companions, once chance had placed them on my path--it was better
than changing them, than feeling that they could be changed, than
revolting against them.... He who stirred me from this fatalism, he
who violently tried to shake me into consciousness, seemed to me then
a mortal enemy--in point of fact, there was danger of death each time
this was done. To regard one's self as a destiny, not to wish one's
self "different"--this, in such circumstances, is sagacity, itself.



7


War, on the other hand, is something different. At heart I am a
warrior. Attacking belongs to my instincts. To _be able to be_ an
enemy, to _be_ an enemy--maybe these things presuppose a strong nature;
in any case all strong natures involve these things. Such natures need
resistance, consequently they go in search of obstacles: the pathos of
aggression belongs of necessity to strength as much as the feelings
of revenge and of rancour belong to weakness. Woman, for instance, is
revengeful; her weakness involves this passion, just as it involves
her susceptibility in the presence of other people's suffering. The
strength of the aggressor can be measured by the opposition which
he needs; every increase of growth betrays itself by a seeking out
of more formidable opponents--or problems: for a philosopher who
is combative challenges even problems to a duel. The task is not
to overcome opponents in general, but only those opponents against
whom one has to summon all one's strength, one's skill, and one's
swordsmanship--in fact, opponents who are one's equals.... To be one's
enemy's equal--this is the first condition of an honourable duel. Where
one despises, one cannot wage war. Where one commands, where one sees
something _beneath_ one, one _ought_ not to wage war. My war tactics
can be reduced to four principles A First, I attack only things that
are triumphant--if necessary I wait until they become triumphant.
Secondly, I attack only those things against which I find no allies,
against which I stand alone--against which I compromise nobody but
myself.... I have not yet taken one single step before the public eye,
which did not compromise me: that is _my_ criterion of a proper mode
of action. Thirdly, I never make personal attacks--I use a personality
merely as a magnifying-glass, by means of which I render a general,
but elusive and scarcely noticeable evil, more apparent. In this way I
attacked David Strauss, or rather the success given to a senile book by
the cultured classes of Germany--by this means I caught German culture
red-handed. In this way I attacked Wagner, or rather the falsity or
mongrel instincts of our "culture" which confounds the super-refined
with the strong, and the effete with the great. Fourthly, I attack
only those things from which all personal differences are excluded, in
which any such thing as a background of disagreeable experiences is
lacking. On the contrary, attacking is to me a proof of goodwill and,
in certain circumstances, of gratitude. By means of it, I do honour to
a thing, I distinguish a thing; whether I associate my name with that
of an institution or a person, by being _against_ or _for_ either,
is all the same to me. If I wage war against Christianity, I feel
justified in doing so, because in that quarter I have met with no fatal
experiences and difficulties--the most earnest Christians have always
been kindly disposed to me. I, personally, the most essential opponent
of Christianity, am far from holding the individual responsible for
what is the fatality of long ages.

May I be allowed to hazard a suggestion concerning one last trait
in my character, which in my intercourse with other men has led me
into some difficulties? I am gifted with a sense of cleanliness the
keenness of which is phenomenal; so much so, that I can ascertain
physiologically--that is to say, smell--the proximity, nay, the inmost
core, the "entrails" of every human soul.... This sensitiveness of mine
is furnished with psychological antennæ, wherewith I feel and grasp
every secret: the quality of concealed filth lying at the base of many
a human character which may be the inevitable outcome of base blood,
and which education may have veneered, is revealed to me at the first
glance. If my observation has been correct, such people, whom my sense
of cleanliness rejects, also become conscious, on their part, of the
cautiousness to which my loathing prompts me: and this does not make
them any more fragrant.... In keeping with a custom which I have long
observed,--pure habits and honesty towards myself are among the first
conditions of my existence, I would die in unclean surroundings,--I
swim, bathe, and splash about, as it were, incessantly in water, in
any kind of perfectly transparent and shining element. That is why
my relations with my fellows try my patience to no small extent; my
humanity does not consist in the fact that I understand the feelings
of my fellows, but that I can endure to understand.... My humanity
is a perpetual process of self-mastery. But I need solitude--that is
to say, recovery, return to myself, the breathing of free, crisp,
bracing air.... The whole of my _Zarathustra_ is a dithyramb in honour
of solitude, or, if I have been understood, in honour of purity. Thank
Heaven, it is not in honour of "pure foolery"![3] He who has an eye for
colour will call him a diamond. The loathing of mankind, of the rabble,
was always my greatest danger.... Would you hearken to the words spoken
by Zarathustra concerning deliverance from loathing?

"What forsooth hath come unto me? How did I deliver myself from
loathing? Who hath made mine eye younger? How did I soar to the height,
where there are no more rabble sitting about the well?

"Did my very loathing forge me wings and the strength to scent
fountains afar off? Verily to the loftiest heights did I need to fly,
to find once more the spring of joyfulness.

"Oh, I found it, my brethren! Up here, on the loftiest height, the
spring of joyfulness gusheth forth for me. And there is a life at the
well of which no rabble can drink with you.

"Almost too fiercely dost thou rush, for me, thou spring of joyfulness!
And ofttimes dost thou empty the pitcher again in trying to fill it.

"And yet must I learn to draw near thee more humbly. Far too eagerly
doth my heart jump to meet thee.

"My heart, whereon my summer burneth, my short, hot, melancholy,
over-blessed summer: how my summer heart yearneth for thy coolness!

"Farewell, the lingering affliction of my spring! Past is the
wickedness of my snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and
summer noontide!

"A summer in the loftiest heights, with cold springs and blessed
stillness: oh come, my friends, that the stillness may wax even more
blessed!

"For this is our height and our home: too high and steep is our
dwelling for all the unclean and their appetites.

"Do but cast your pure eyes into the well of my joyfulness, my friends!
How could it thus become muddy! It will laugh back at you with its
purity.

"On the tree called Future do we build our nest: eagles shall bring
food in their beaks unto us lonely ones!

"Verily not the food whereof the unclean might partake. They would
think they ate fire and would burn their mouths!

"Verily, no abodes for the unclean do we here hold in readiness! To
their bodies our happiness would seem an ice-cavern, and to their
spirits also!

"And like strong winds will we live above them, neighbours to the
eagles, companions of the snow, and playmates of the sun: thus do
strong winds live.

"And like a wind shall I one day blow amidst them, and take away their
soul's breath with my spirit: thus my future willeth it.

"Verily, a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low lands; and this is
his counsel to his foes and to all those who spit and spew: 'Beware of
spitting against the wind!'"


[Footnote 1: The right which every Polish deputy, whether a great or an
inferior nobleman, possessed of forbidding the passing of any measure
by the Diet, was called in Poland the _liberum veto_ (in Polish _nie
pozwalam_), and brought all legislation to a standstill.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: Eugen Dübring is a philosopher and political economist
whose general doctrine might be characterised as a sort of abstract
Materialism with an optimistic colouring.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: This, of course, is a reference to Wagner's _Parsifal._
See my note on p. 96 of _The Will to Power_ vol. i.--TR.]




WHY I AM SO CLEVER



1


Why do I know more things than other people? Why, in fact, am I so
clever? I have never pondered over questions that are not questions. I
have never squandered my strength. Of actual religious difficulties,
for instance, I have no experience. I have never known what it is to
feel "sinful." In the same way I completely lack any reliable criterion
for ascertaining what constitutes a prick of conscience: from all
accounts a prick of conscience does not seem to be a very estimable
thing.... Once it was done I should hate to leave an action of mine
in the lurch; I should prefer completely to omit the evil outcome,
the consequences, from the problem concerning the value of an action.
In the face of evil consequences one is too ready to lose the proper
standpoint from which one's deed ought to be considered. A prick of
conscience strikes me as a sort of "evil eye." Something that has
failed should be honoured all the more jealously, precisely because
it has failed--this is much more in keeping with my morality.--"God,"
"the immortality of the soul," "salvation," a "beyond"--to all these
notions, even as a child, I never paid any attention whatsoever, nor
did I waste any time upon them,--maybe I was never _naif_ enough for
that?--I am quite unacquainted with atheism as a result, and still
less as an event in my life: in me it is inborn, instinctive. I am
too inquisitive, too incredulous, too high spirited, to be satisfied
with such a palpably clumsy solution of things. God is a too palpably
clumsy solution of things; a solution which shows a lack of delicacy
towards us thinkers--at bottom He is really no more than a coarse
and rude _prohibition_ of us: ye shall not think!... I am much more
interested in another question,--a question upon which the "salvation
of humanity" depends to a far greater degree than it does upon any
piece of theological curiosity: I refer to nutrition. For ordinary
purposes, it may be formulated as follows: "How precisely must _thou_
feed thyself in order to attain to thy maximum of power, or _virtù_
in the Renaissance style,--of virtue free from moralic acid?" My
experiences in regard to this matter have been as bad as they possibly
could be; I am surprised that I set myself this question so late in
life, and that it took me so long to draw "rational" conclusions
from my experiences. Only the absolute worth-_1_ lessness of German
culture--its "idealism"--can to some extent explain how it was that
precisely in this matter I was so backward that my ignorance was almost
saintly. This "culture," which from first to last teaches one to lose
sight of actual things and to hunt after thoroughly problematic and
so-called ideal aims, as, for instance, "classical culture"--as if it
were not hopeless from the start to try to unite "classical" and
"German" in one concept. It is even a little comical--try and imagine
a "classically cultured" citizen of Leipzig!--Indeed, I can say, that
up to a very mature age, my food was entirely bad--expressed morally,
it was "impersonal," "selfless," "altruistic," to the glory of cooks
and all other fellow-Christians. It was through the cooking in vogue
at Leipzig, for instance, together with my first study of Schopenhauer
(1865), that I earnestly renounced my "Will to Live." To spoil one's
stomach by absorbing insufficient nourishment--this problem seemed to
my mind solved with admirable felicity by the above-mentioned cookery.
(It is said that in the year 1866 changes were introduced into this
department.) But as to German cookery in general--what has it not got
on its conscience! Soup _before_ the meal (still called _alla tedesca_
in the Venetian cookery books of the sixteenth century); meat boiled
to shreds, vegetables cooked with fat and flour; the degeneration of
pastries into paper-weights! And, if you add thereto the absolutely
bestial post-prandial drinking habits of the _ancients,_ and not alone
of the ancient Germans, you will understand where German intellect
took its origin--that is to say, in sadly disordered intestines....
German intellect is indigestion; it can assimilate nothing. But even
English diet, which in comparison with German, and indeed with French
alimentation, seems to me to constitute a "return to Nature,"--that is
to say, to cannibalism,--is profoundly opposed to my own instincts. It
seems to me to give the intellect heavy feet, in fact, Englishwomen's
feet.... The best cooking is that of Piedmont. Alcoholic drinks do
not agree with me; a single glass of wine or beer a day is amply
sufficient to turn life into a valley of tears for me;--in Munich live
my antipodes. Although I admit that this knowledge came to me somewhat
late, it already formed part of my experience even as a child. As a boy
I believed that the drinking of wine and the smoking of tobacco were at
first but the vanities of youths, and later merely bad habits. Maybe
the poor wine of Naumburg was partly responsible for this poor opinion
of wine in general. In order to believe that wine was exhilarating, I
should have had to be a Christian--in other words, I should have had to
believe in what, to my mind, is an absurdity. Strange to say, whereas
small quantities of alcohol, taken with plenty of water, succeed in
making me feel out of sorts, large quantities turn me almost into a
rollicking tar. Even as a boy I showed my bravado in this respect. To
compose a long Latin essay in one night, to revise and recopy it, to
aspire with my pen to emulating the exactitude and the terseness of my
model, Sallust, and to pour a few very strong grogs over it all--this
mode of procedure, while I was a pupil at the venerable old school of
Pforta, was not in the least out of keeping with my physiology, nor
perhaps with that of Sallust, however much it may have been alien to
dignified Pforta. Later on, towards the middle of my life, I grew more
and more opposed to alcoholic drinks: I, an opponent of vegetarianism,
who have experienced what vegetarianism is,--just as Wagner, who
converted me back to meat, experienced it,--cannot with sufficient
earnestness advise all more _spiritual_ natures to abstain absolutely
from alcohol. Water answers the purpose.... I have a predilection in
favour of those places where in all directions one has opportunities
of drinking from running brooks (Nice, Turin, Sils). _In vino Veritas_:
it seems that here once more I am at variance with the rest of the
world about the concept "Truth"--with me spirit moves on the face of
the waters.... Here are a few more indications as to my morality. A
heavy meal is digested more easily than an inadequate one. The first
principle of a good digestion is that the stomach should become active
as a whole. A man ought, therefore, to know the size of his stomach.
For the same reasons all those interminable meals, which I call
interrupted sacrificial feasts, and which are to be had at any table
d'hôte, are strongly to be deprecated. Nothing should be eaten between
meals, coffee should be given up--coffee makes one gloomy. Tea is
beneficial only in the morning. It should be taken in small quantities,
but very strong. It may be very harmful, and indispose you for the
whole day, if it be taken the least bit too weak. Everybody has his own
standard in this matter, often between the narrowest and most delicate
limits. In an enervating climate tea is not a good beverage with which
to start the day: an hour before taking it an excellent thing is to
drink a cup of thick cocoa, feed from oil. Remain seated as little as
possible, put no trust in any thought that is not born in the open, to
the accompaniment of free bodily motion--nor in one in which even the
muscles do not celebrate a feast. All prejudices take their origin in
the intestines. A sedentary life, as I have already said elsewhere, is
the real sin against the Holy Spirit.



2.


To the question of nutrition, that of locality and climate is next of
kin. Nobody is so constituted as to be able to live everywhere and
anywhere; and he who has great duties to perform, which lay claim
to all his strength, has, in this respect, a very limited choice.
The influence of climate upon the bodily functions, affecting their
acceleration or retardation, extends so far, that a blunder in the
choice of locality and climate is able not only to alienate a man from
his actual duty, but also to withhold it from him altogether, so that
he never even comes face to face with it. Animal vigour never acquires
enough strength in him in order to reach that pitch of artistic freedom
which makes his own soul whisper to him: I, alone, can do that.... Ever
so slight a tendency to laziness in the intestines, once it has become
a habit, is quite sufficient to make something mediocre, something
"German" out of a genius; the climate of Germany, alone, is enough to
discourage the strongest and most heroically disposed intestines. The
tempo of the body's functions is closely bound up with the agility or
the clumsiness of the spirit's feet; spirit itself is indeed only a
form of these organic functions. Let anybody make a list of the places
in which men of great intellect have been found, and are still found;
where wit, subtlety, and malice constitute happiness; where genius
is almost necessarily at home: all of them rejoice in exceptionally
dry air. Paris, Provence, Florence, Jerusalem, Athens--these names
prove something, namely: that genius is conditioned by dry air, by a
pure sky--that is to say, by rapid organic functions, by the constant
and ever-present possibility of procuring for one's self great and
even enormous quantities of strength. I have a certain case in mind
in which a man of remarkable intellect and independent spirit became
a narrow, craven specialist and a grumpy old crank, simply owing to
a lack of subtlety in his instinct for climate. And I myself might
have been an example of the same thing, if illness had not compelled
me to reason, and to reflect upon reason realistically. Now that I
have learnt through long practice to read the effects of climatic and
meteorological influences, from my own body, as though from a very
delicate and reliable instrument, and that I am able to calculate the
change in degrees of atmospheric moisture by means of physiological
observations upon myself, even on so short a journey as that from
Turin to Milan; I think with horror of the ghastly fact that my
whole life, until the last ten years,--the most perilous years,--has
always been spent in the wrong, and what to me ought to have been
the most forbidden, places. Naumburg, Pforta, Thuringia in general,
Leipzig, Bâle, Venice--so many ill-starred places for a constitution
like mine. If I cannot recall one single happy reminiscence of my
childhood and youth, it is nonsense to suppose that so-called "moral"
causes could account for this--as, for instance, the incontestable
fact that I lacked companions that could have satisfied me; for this
fact is the same to-day as it ever was, and it does not prevent me
from being cheerful and brave. But it was ignorance in physiological
matters--that confounded "Idealism"--that was the real curse of my
life. This was the superfluous and foolish element in my existence;
something from which nothing could spring, and for which there can be
no settlement and no compensation. As the outcome of this "Idealism"
I regard all the blunders, the great aberrations of instinct, and
the "modest specialisations" which drew me aside from the task of my
life; as, for instance, the fact that I became a philologist--why
not at least a medical man or anything else which might have opened
my eyes? My days at Bâle, the whole of my intellectual routine,
including my daily time-table, was an absolutely senseless abuse of
extraordinary powers, without the slightest compensation for the
strength that I spent, without even a thought of what I was squandering
and how its place might be filled. I lacked all subtlety in egoism,
all the fostering care of an imperative instinct; I was in a state
in which one is ready to regard one's self as anybody's equal, a
state of "disinterestedness," a forgetting of one's distance from
others--something, in short, for which I can never forgive myself.
When I had well-nigh reached the end of my tether, simply because I
had almost reached my end, I began to reflect upon the fundamental
absurdity of my life--"Idealism." It was _illness_ that first brought
me to reason.



3


After the choice of nutrition, the choice of climate and locality, the
third matter concerning which one must not on any account make a
blunder, is the choice of the manner in which one _recuperates one's
strength._ Here, again, according to the extent to which a spirit is
_sui generis,_ the limits of that which he can allow himself--in other
words, the limits of that which is beneficial to him--become more and
more confined. As far as I in particular am concerned, _reading_ in
general belongs to my means of recuperation; consequently it belongs
to that which rids me of myself, to that which enables me to wander
in strange sciences and strange souls--to that, in fact, about which
I am no longer in earnest. Indeed, it is while reading that I recover
from _my_ earnestness. During the time that I am deeply absorbed in
my work, no books are found within my reach; it would never occur
to me to allow any one to speak or even to think in my presence.
For that is what reading would mean.... Has any one ever actually
noticed, that, during the period of profound tension to which the
state of pregnancy condemns not only the mind, but also, at bottom,
the whole organism, accident and every kind of external stimulus acts
too acutely and strikes too deep? Accident and external stimuli must,
as far as possible, be avoided: a sort of walling-of-one's-self-in is
one of the primary instinctive precautions of spiritual pregnancy.
Shall I allow a strange thought to steal secretly over the wall?
For that is what reading would mean.... The periods of work and
fruit-fulness are followed by periods of recuperation: come hither,
ye delightful, intellectual, intelligent books! Shall I read German
books?... I must go back six months to catch myself with a book in
my hand. What was it? An excellent study by Victor Brochard upon the
Greek sceptics, in which my Laertiana[1] was used to advantage. The
sceptics!--the only _honourable_ types among that double-faced and
sometimes quintuple-faced throng, the philosophers!.... Otherwise I
almost always take refuge in the same books: altogether their number
is small; they are books which are precisely my proper fare. It is
not perhaps in my nature to read much, and of all sorts: a library
makes me ill. Neither is it my nature to love much or many kinds of
things. Suspicion or even hostility towards new books is much more
akin to my instinctive feeling than "toleration," _largeur de cœur,_
and other forms of "neighbour-love." ... It is to a small number of
old French authors, that I always return again and again; I believe
only in French culture, and regard everything else in Europe which
calls itself "culture" as a misunderstanding. I do not even take
the German kind into consideration.... The few instances of higher
culture with which I have met in Germany were all French in their
origin. The most striking example of this was Madame Cosima Wagner,
by far the most decisive voice in matters of taste that I have ever
heard. If I do not read, but literally love Pascal? as the most
instinctive sacrifice to Christianity, killing himself inch by inch,
first bodily, then spiritually, according to the terrible consistency
of this most appalling form of inhuman cruelty; if I have something
of Montaigne's mischievousness in my soul, and--who knows?--perhaps
also in my body; if my artist's taste endeavours to defend the names
of Molière, Corneille, and Racine, and not without bitterness, against
such a wild genius as Shakespeare--all this does not prevent me from
regarding even the latter-day Frenchmen also as charming companions.
I can think of absolutely no century in history, in which a netful of
more inquisitive and at the same time more subtle psychologists could
be drawn up together than in the Paris of the present day. Let me
mention a few at random--for their number is by no means small--Paul
Bourget, Pierre Loti, Gyp, Meilhac, Anatole France, Jules Lemaitre;
or, to point to one of strong race, a genuine Latin, of whom I am
particularly fond, Guy de Maupassant. Between ourselves, I prefer this
generation even to its masters, all of whom were corrupted by German
philosophy (Taine, for instance, by Hegel, whom he has to thank for
his misunderstanding of great men and great periods). Wherever Germany
extends her sway, she _ruins_ culture. It was the war which first saved
the spirit of France.... Stendhal is one of the happiest accidents of
my life--for everything that marks an epoch in it has been brought
to me by accident and never by means of a recommendation. He is quite
priceless, with his psychologist's eye, quick at forestalling and
anticipating; with his grasp of facts, which is reminiscent of the same
art in the greatest of all masters of facts (_ex ungue Napoleonem_);
and, last but not least, as an honest atheist--a specimen which is
both rare and difficult to discover in France--all honour to Prosper
Mérimée!... Maybe that I am even envious of Stendhal? He robbed
me of the best atheistic joke, which I of all people could have
perpetrated: "God's only excuse is that He does not exist" ... I myself
have said somewhere--What has been the greatest objection to Life
hitherto?--God....



4


It was Heinrich Heine who gave me the most perfect idea of what a
lyrical poet could be. In vain do I search through all the kingdoms of
antiquity or of modern times for anything to resemble his sweet and
passionate music. He possessed that divine wickedness, without which
perfection itself becomes unthinkable to me,--I estimate the value of
men, of races, according to the extent to which they are unable to
conceive of a god who has not a dash of the satyr in him. And with
what mastery he wields his native tongue! One day it will be said of
Heine and me that we were by far the greatest artists of the German
language that have ever existed, and that we left all the efforts that
mere Germans made in this language an incalculable distance behind
us. I must be profoundly related to Byron's _Manfred:_ of all the
dark abysses in this work I found the counterparts in my own soul--at
the age of thirteen I was ripe for this book. Words fail me, I have
only a look, for those who dare to utter the name of _Faust_ in the
presence of _Manfred._ The Germans are _incapable_ of conceiving
anything sublime: for a proof of this, look at Schumann! Out of anger
for this mawkish Saxon, I once deliberately composed a counter-overture
to _Manfred,_ of which Hans von Bülow declared he had never seen the
like before on paper: such compositions amounted to a violation of
Euterpe. When I cast about me for my highest formula of Shakespeare,
I find invariably but this one: that he conceived the type of Cæsar.
Such things a man cannot guess--he either is the thing, or he is not.
The great poet draws his creations only from out of his own reality.
This is so to such an extent, that often after a lapse of time he
can no longer endure his own work.... After casting a glance between
the pages of my _Zarathustra,_ I pace my room to and fro for half
an hour at a time, unable to overcome an insufferable fit of tears.
I know of no more heartrending reading than Shakespeare: how a man
must have suffered to be so much in need of playing the clown! Is
Hamlet _understood_? It is not doubt, but certitude that drives one
mad.... But in order to feel this, one must be profound, one must be
an abyss, a philosopher.... We all fear the truth.... And, to make a
confession; I feel instinctively certain and convinced that Lord Bacon
is the originator, the self-torturer, of this most sinister kind of
literature: what do I care about the miserable gabble of American
muddlers and blockheads? But the power for the greatest realism in
vision is not only compatible with the greatest realism in deeds,
with the monstrous in deeds, with crime--_it actually presupposes the
latter._ ... We do not know half enough about Lord Bacon--the first
realist in all the highest acceptation of this word--to be sure of
everything he did, everything he willed, and everything he experienced
in his inmost soul.... Let the critics go to hell! Suppose I had
christened my _Zarathustra_ with a name not my own,--let us say with
Richard Wagner's name,--the acumen of two thousand years would not have
sufficed to guess that the author of _Human, all-too-Human_ was the
visionary of _Zarathustra._



5


As I am speaking here of the recreations of my life, I feel I must
express a word or two of gratitude for that which has refreshed me by
far the most heartily and most profoundly. This, without the slightest
doubt, was my intimate relationship with Richard Wagner. All my other
relationships with men I treat quite lightly; but I would not have the
days I spent at Tribschen--those days of confidence, of cheerfulness,
of sublime flashes, and of profound moments--blotted from my life
at any price. I know not what Wagner may have been for others; but
no cloud ever darkened _our_ sky. And this brings me back again to
France,--I have no arguments against Wagnerites, and _hoc genus omne_
who believe that they do honour to Wagner by believing him to be
like themselves; for such people I have only a contemptuous curl of
my lip. With a nature like mine, which is so strange to everything
Teutonic, that even the presence of a German retards my digestion, my
first meeting with Wagner was the first moment in my life in which I
breathed freely: I felt him, I honoured him, as a foreigner, as the
opposite and the incarnate contradiction of all "German virtues." We
who as children breathed the marshy atmosphere of the fifties, are
necessarily pessimists in regard to the concept "German"; we cannot
be anything else than revolutionaries--we can assent to no state of
affairs which allows the canting bigot to be at the top. I care not
a jot whether this canting bigot acts in different colours to-day,
whether he dresses in scarlet or dons the uniform of a hussar.[2] Very
well, then! Wagner was a revolutionary--he fled from the Germans....
As an artist, a man has no home in Europe save in Paris; that subtlety
of all the five senses which Wagner's art presupposes, those fingers
that can detect slight gradations, psychological morbidity--all these
things can be found only in Paris. Nowhere else can you meet with
this passion for questions of form, this earnestness in matters of
_mise-en-scène,_ which is the Parisian earnestness _par excellence._
In Germany no one has any idea of the tremendous ambition that fills
the heart of a Parisian artist. The German is a good fellow. Wagner was
by no means a good fellow.... But I have already said quite enough
on the subject of Wagner's real nature (see _Beyond Good and Evil,_
Aphorism 269), and about those to whom he is most closely related.
He is one of the late French romanticists, that high-soaring and
heaven-aspiring band of artists, like Delacroix and Berlioz, who in
their inmost nacres are sick and incurable, and who are all fanatics
of _expression,_ and virtuosos through and through.... Who, in sooth,
was the first intelligent follower of Wagner? Charles Baudelaire, the
very man who first understood Delacroix--that typical decadent, in whom
a whole generation of artists saw their reflection; he was perhaps the
last of them too.... What is it that I have never forgiven Wagner?
The fact that he condescended to the Germans--that he became a German
Imperialist.... Wherever Germany spreads, she _ruins_ culture.



6


Taking everything into consideration, I could never have survived my
youth without Wagnerian music. For I was condemned to the society
of Germans. If a man wish to get rid of a feeling of insufferable
oppression, he has to take to hashish. Well, I had to take to Wagner.
Wagner is the counter-poison to everything essentially German--the fact
that he is a poison too, I do not deny. From the moment that _Tristan_
was arranged for the piano--all honour to you, Herr von Bülow!--I was
a Wagnerite. Wagner's previous works seemed beneath me--they were too
commonplace, too "German." ... But to this day I am still seeking for a
work which would be a match to _Tristan_ in dangerous fascination, and
possess the same gruesome and dulcet quality of infinity; I seek among
all the arts in vain. All the quaint features of Leonardo da Vinci's
work lose their charm at the sound of the first bar in _Tristan._
This work is without question Wagner's _non plus ultra_; after its
creation, the composition of the _Mastersingers_ and of the _Ring_ was
a relaxation to him. To become more healthy--this in a nature like
Wagner's amounts to going backwards. The curiosity of the psychologist
is so great in me, that I regard it as quite a special privilege
to have lived at the right time, and to have lived precisely among
Germans, in order to be ripe for this work. The world must indeed be
empty for him who has never been unhealthy enough for this "infernal
voluptuousness": it is allowable, it is even imperative, to employ a
mystic formula for this purpose. I suppose I know better than any one
the prodigious feats of which Wagner was capable, the fifty worlds of
strange ecstasies to which no one else had wings to soar; and as I am
alive to-day and strong enough to turn even the most suspicious and
most dangerous things to my own advantage, and thus to grow stronger,
I declare Wagner to have been the greatest benefactor of my life. The
bond which unites us is the fact that we have suffered greater agony,
even at each other's hands, than most men are able to bear nowadays,
and this will always keep our names associated in the minds of men.
For, just as Wagner is merely a misunderstanding among Germans, so, in
truth, am I, and ever will be. Ye lack two centuries of psychological
and artistic discipline, my dear countrymen!... But ye can never
recover the time lost.



7


To the most exceptional of my readers I should like to say just one
word about what I really exact from music. It must be cheerful and yet
profound, like an October afternoon. It must be original, exuberant,
and tender, and like a dainty, soft woman in roguishness and grace ... I
shall never admit that a German _can_ understand what music is. Those
musicians who are called German, the greatest and most famous foremost,
are all foreigners, either Slavs, Croats, Italians, Dutchmen--or Jews;
or else, like Heinrich Schütz, Bach, and Händel, they are Germans of
a strong race which is now extinct. For my own part, I have still
enough of the Pole left in me to let all other music go, if only I
can keep Chopin. For three reasons I would except Wagner's _Siegfried
Idyll,_ and perhaps also one or two things of Liszt, who excelled all
other musicians in the noble tone of his orchestration; and finally
everything that has been produced beyond the Alps_--this side_ of the
Alps.[3] I could not possibly dispense with Rossini, and still less
with my Southern soul in music, the work of my Venetian maestro, Pietro
Gasti. And when I say beyond the Alps, all I really mean is Venice.
If I try to find a new word for music, I can never find any other
than Venice. I know not how to draw any distinction between tears
and music. I do not know how to think either of joy, or of the south,
without a shudder of fear.

On the bridge I stood
Lately, in gloomy night.
Came a distant song:
In golden drops it rolled
Over the glittering rim away.
Music, gondolas, lights--
Drunk, swam far forth in the gloom....

A stringed instrument, my soul,
Sang, imperceptibly moved,
A gondola song by stealth,
Gleaming for gaudy blessedness.
--Hearkened any thereto?



8


In all these things--in the choice of food, place, climate, and
recreation--the instinct of self-preservation is dominant, and this
instinct manifests itself with least ambiguity when it acts as an
instinct of defence. To close one's eyes to much, to seal one's ears to
much, to keep certain things at a distance--this is the first principle
of prudence, the first proof of the fact that a man is not an accident
but a necessity. The popular word for this instinct of defence is
_taste._ A man's imperative command is not only to say "no" in cases
where "yes" would be a sign of "disinterestedness," but also to say
"no" _as seldom as possible._ One must part with all that which compels
one to repeat "no," with ever greater frequency. The rationale of this
principle is that all discharges of defensive forces, however slight
they may be, involve enormous and absolutely superfluous losses when
they become regular and habitual. Our greatest expenditure of strength
is made up of those small and most frequent discharges of it. The act
of keeping things off, of holding them at a distance, amounts to a
discharge of strength,--do not deceive yourselves on this point!--and
an expenditure of energy directed at purely negative ends. Simply by
being compelled to keep constantly on his guard, a man may grow so weak
as to be unable any longer to defend himself. Suppose I were to step
out of my house, and, instead of the quiet and aristocratic city of
Turin, I were to find a German provincial town, my instinct would have
to brace itself together in order to repel all that which would pour in
upon it from this crushed-down and cowardly world. Or suppose I were
to find a large German city--that structure of vice in which nothing
grows, but where every single thing, whether good or bad, is squeezed
in from outside. In such circumstances should I not be compelled to
become a hedgehog? But to have prickles amounts to a squandering of
strength; they even constitute a twofold luxury, when, if we only chose
to do so, we could dispense with them and open our hands instead....

Another form of prudence and self-defence consists in trying to
react as seldom as possible, and to keep one's self aloof from those
circumstances and conditions wherein one would be condemned, as it
were, to suspend one's "liberty" and one's initiative, and become a
mere reacting medium. As an example of this I point to the intercourse
with books. The scholar who, in sooth, does little else than handle
books--with the philologist of average attainments their number may
amount to two hundred a day--ultimately forgets entirely and completely
the capacity of thinking for himself. When he has not a book between
his fingers he cannot think. When he thinks, he responds to a stimulus
(a thought he has read),--finally all he does is to react. The scholar
exhausts his whole strength in saying either "yes" or "no" to matter
which has already been thought out, or in criticising it--he is no
longer capable of thought on his own account.... In him the instinct
of self-defence has decayed, otherwise he would defend himself against
books. The scholar is a decadent. With my own eyes I have seen gifted,
richly endowed, and free-spirited natures already "read to ruins" at
thirty, and mere wax vestas that have to be rubbed before they can give
off any sparks--or "thoughts." To set to early in the morning, at the
break of day, in all the fulness and dawn of one's strength, and to
read a book--this I call positively vicious!



9


At this point I can no longer evade a direct answer to the question,
_how one becomes what one is._ And in giving it, I shall have to
touch upon that masterpiece in the art of self-preservation, which is
_selfishness._ ... Granting that one's life-task--the determination and
the fate of one's life-task--greatly exceeds the average measure of
such things, nothing more dangerous could be conceived than to come
face to face with one's self by the side of this life-task. The fact
that one becomes what one is, presupposes that one has not the remotest
suspicion of what one is. From this standpoint even the blunders of
one's life have their own meaning and value, the temporary deviations
and aberrations, the moments of hesitation and of modesty, the
earnestness wasted upon duties which lie outside the actual life-task.
In these matters great wisdom, perhaps even the highest wisdom, comes
into activity: in these circumstances, in which _nosce teipsum_ would
be the sure road to ruin, forgetting one's self, misunderstanding
one's self, belittling one's self, narrowing one's self, and making
one's self mediocre, amount to reason itself. Expressed morally, to
love one's neighbour and to live for others and for other things
_may_ be the means of protection employed to maintain the hardest
kind of egoism. This is the exceptional case in which I, contrary
to my principle and conviction, take the side of the altruistic
instincts; for here they are concerned in subserving selfishness
and self-discipline. The whole surface of consciousness--for
consciousness _is_ a surface--must be kept free from any one of the
great imperatives. Beware even of every striking word, of every
striking attitude! They are all so many risks which the instinct runs
of "understanding itself" too soon. Meanwhile the organising "idea,"
which is destined to become master, grows and continues to grow into
the depths,--it begins to command, it leads you slowly back from your
deviations and aberrations, it prepares individual qualities and
capacities, which one day will make themselves felt as indispensable
to the whole of your task,--step by step it cultivates all the
serviceable faculties, before it ever whispers a word concerning the
dominant task, the "goal," the "object," and the "meaning" of it all.
Looked at from this standpoint my life is simply amazing. For the task
of _transvaluing values,_ more capacities were needful perhaps than
could well be found side by side in one individual; and above all,
antagonistic capacities which had to be free from the mutual strife
and destruction which they involve. An order of rank among capacities;
distance; the art of separating without creating hostility; to refrain
from confounding things; to keep from reconciling things; to possess
enormous multifariousness and yet to be the reverse of chaos--all
this was the first condition, the long secret work, and the artistic
mastery of my instinct. Its superior guardianship manifested itself
with such exceeding strength, that not once did I ever dream of what
was growing within me--until suddenly all my capacities were ripe, and
one day burst forth in all the perfection of their highest bloom. I
cannot remember ever having exerted myself, I can point to no trace of
_struggle_ in my life; I am the reverse of a heroic nature. To "will"
something, to "strive" after something, to have an "aim" or a "desire"
in my mind--I know none of these things from experience. Even at this
moment I look out upon my future--a _broad_ future!--as upon a calm
sea: no sigh of longing makes a ripple on its surface. I have not the
slightest wish that anything should be otherwise than it is: I myself
would not be otherwise.... But in this matter I have always been the
same. I have never had a desire. A man who, after his four-and-fortieth
year, can say that he has never bothered himself about _honours,
women,_ or _money_!--not that they did not come his way.... It was
thus that I became one day a University Professor--I had never had
the remotest idea of such a thing; for I was scarcely four-and-twenty
years of age. In the same way, two years previously, I had one day
become a philologist, in the sense that my _first_ philological work,
my start in every way, was expressly obtained by my master Ritschl for
publication in his _Rheinisches Museum._[4] (Ritschl--and I say it
in all reverence--was the only genial scholar that I have ever met.
He possessed that pleasant kind of depravity which distinguishes us
Thuringians, and which makes even a German sympathetic--even in the
pursuit of truth we prefer to avail ourselves of roundabout ways. In
saying this I do not mean to underestimate in any way my Thuringian
brother, the intelligent Leopold von Ranke....)



10


You may be wondering why I should actually have related all these
trivial and, according to traditional accounts, insignificant details
to you; such action can but tell against me, more particularly if I
am fated to figure in great causes. To this I reply that these trivial
matters--diet, locality, climate, and one's mode of recreation, the
whole casuistry of; self-love--are inconceivably more important than,
all that which has hitherto been held in high esteem! It is precisely
in this quarter that we must begin to learn afresh. All those things
which mankind has valued with such earnestness heretofore are not even
real; they are mere creations of fancy, or, more strictly speaking,
_lies_ born of the evil instincts of diseased and, in the deepest
sense, noxious natures--all the concepts, "God," "soul," "virtue,"
"sin," "Beyond," "truth," "eternal life." ... But the greatness of
human nature, its "divinity," was sought for in them.... All questions
of politics, of social order, of education, have been falsified, root
and branch, owing to the fact that the most noxious men have been
taken for great men, and that people were taught to despise the small
things, or rather the fundamental things, of life. If I now choose to
compare myself with those creatures who have hitherto been honoured as
the first among men, the difference becomes obvious. I do not reckon
the so-called "first" men even as human beings--for me they are the
excrements of mankind, the products of disease and of the instinct
of revenge: they are so many monsters laden with rottenness, so many
hopeless incurables, who avenge themselves on life.... I wish to be
the opposite of these people: it is my privilege to have the very
sharpest discernment for every sign of healthy instincts. There is no
such thing as a morbid trait in me; even in times of serious illness
I have never grown morbid, and you might seek in vain for a trace of
fanaticism in my nature. No one can point to any moment of my life
in which I have assumed either an arrogant or a pathetic attitude.
Pathetic attitudes are not in keeping with greatness; he who needs
attitudes is false.... Beware of all picturesque men! Life was easy--in
fact easiest--to me, in those periods when it exacted the heaviest
duties from me. Whoever could have seen me during the seventy days of
this autumn, when, without interruption, I did a host of things of
the highest rank--things that no man can do nowadays--with a sense of
responsibility for all the ages yet to come, would have noticed no sign
of tension in my condition, but rather a state of overflowing freshness
and good cheer. Never have I eaten with more pleasant sensations,
never has my sleep been better. I know of no other manner of dealing
with great tasks, than as _play_: this, as a sign of greatness, is
an essential prerequisite. The slightest constraint, a sombre mien,
any hard accent in the voice--all these things are objections to a
man, but how much more to his work!... One must not have nerves....
Even to _suffer_ from solitude is an objection--the only thing I have
always suffered from is "multitude."[5] At an absurdly tender age, in
fact when I was seven years old, I already knew that no human speech
would ever reach me: did any one ever see me sad on that account? At
present I still possess the same affability towards everybody, I am
even full of consideration for the lowest: in all this there is not
an atom of haughtiness or of secret contempt. He whom I despise soon
guesses that he is despised by me: the very fact of my existence is
enough to rouse indignation in all those who have polluted blood in
their veins. My formula for greatness in man is! _amor fati_: the fact
that a man wishes nothing to be different, either in front of him or
behind him, or for all eternity. Not only must the necessary be borne,
and on no account concealed,--all idealism is falsehood in the face of
necessity,--but it must also be _loved...._


[Footnote 1: Nietzsche, as is well known, devoted much time when a
student at Leipzig to the study of three Greek philosophers, Theognis,
Diogenes Laertius, and Democritus. This study first bore fruit in the
case of a paper, _Zur Geschichte der Theognideischen Spruchsammlung_,
which was subsequently published by the most influential journal of
classical philology in Germany. Later, however, it enabled Nietzsche to
enter for the prize offered by the University of Leipzig for an essay,
_De fontibus Diogenis Laertii._ He was successful in gaining the prize,
and the treatise was afterwards published in the _Rheinisches Museum,_
and is still quoted as an authority. It is to this essay, written when
he was twenty-three years of age, that he here refers.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: The favourite uniform of the German Emperor, William
II.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: In the latter years of his life, Nietzsche practically
made Italy his home.--TR.]

[Footnote 4: See note on page 37.]

[Footnote 5: The German words are, _Einsamkeit_ and _Vielsamkeit._ The
latter was coined by Nietzsche. The English word "multitude" should,
therefore, be understood as signifying multifarious instincts and
gifts, which in Nietzsche strove for ascendancy and caused him more
suffering than any solitude. Complexity of this sort, held in check
by a dominant instinct, as in Nietzsche's case, is of course the only
possible basis of an artistic nature.--TR.]




WHY I WRITE SUCH EXCELLENT BOOKS



1


I am one thing, my creations are another. Here, before I speak of the
books themselves, I shall touch upon the question of the understanding
and misunderstanding with which they have met. I shall proceed to
do this in as perfunctory a manner as the occasion demands; for the
time has by no means come for this question. My time has not yet
come either; some are born posthumously. One s day institutions will
be needed in which men will live and teach, as I understand living
and teaching; maybe, also, that by that time, chairs will be founded
and endowed for the interpretation of _Zarathustra. _ But I should
regard it as a complete contradiction of myself, if I expected to
find ears and eyes for my truths to-day: the fact that no one listens
to me, that no one knows how to receive at my hands to-day, is not
only comprehensible, it seems to me quite the proper thing. I do not
wish to be mistaken for another--and to this end I must not mistake
myself. To repeat what I have already said, I can point to but few
instances of ill-will in my life: and as for literary ill-will, I
could mention scarcely a single example of it. On the other hand, I
have met with far too much _pure foolery_!... It seems to me that to
take up one of my books is one of the rarest honours that a man can
pay himself--even supposing that he put his shoes from off his feet
beforehand, not to mention boots.... When on one occasion Dr. Heinrich
von Stein honestly complained that he could not understand a word of
my _Zarathustra,_ I said to him that this was just as it should be: to
have understood six sentences in that book--that is to say, to have
lived them--raises a man to a higher level among mortals than "modern"
men can attain. With this feeling of distance how could I even wish to
be read by the "moderns" whom I know! My triumph is just the opposite
of what Schopenhauer's was--I say "_Non_ legor, _non_ legar."--Not
that I should like to underestimate the pleasure I have derived from
the innocence with which my works have frequently been contradicted.
As late as last summer, at a time when I was attempting, perhaps by
means of my weighty, all-too-weighty literature, to throw the rest of
literature off its balance, a certain professor of Berlin University
kindly gave me to understand that I ought really to make use of a
different form: no one could read such stuff as I wrote.--Finally, it
was not Germany, but Switzerland that presented me with the two most
extreme cases. An essay on _Beyond Good and Evil,_ by Dr. V. Widmann in
the paper called the _Bund,_ under the heading "Nietzsche's Dangerous
Book," and a general account of all my works, from the pen of Herr
Karl Spitteler, also in the _Bund,_ constitute a maximum in my life--I
shall not say of what.... The latter treated my _Zarathustra,_ for
instance as "_advanced exercises in style_," and expressed the wish
that later on I might try and attend to the question of substance as
well; Dr. Widmann assured me of his respect for the courage I showed
in endeavouring to abolish all decent feeling. Thanks to a little
trick of destiny, every sentence in these criticisms seemed, with
a consistency that I could but admire, to be an inverted truth. In
fact it was most remarkable that all one had to do was to "transvalue
all values," in order to hit the nail on the head with regard to me,
instead of striking my head with the nail.... I am more particularly
anxious therefore to discover an explanation. After all, no one can
draw more out of things, books included, than he already knows. A man
has no ears for that to which experience has given him no access. To
take an extreme case, suppose a book contains simply incidents which
lie quite outside the range of general or even rare experience--suppose
it to be the _first_ language to express a whole series of experiences.
In this case nothing it contains will really be heard at all, and,
thanks to an acoustic delusion, people will believe that where nothing
is heard there is nothing to hear.... This, at least, has been my
usual experience, and proves, if you will, the originality of my
experience. He who thought he had understood something in my work, had
as a rule adjusted something in it to his own image--not infrequently
the very opposite of myself, an "idealist," for instance. He who
understood nothing in my work, would deny that I was worth considering
at all.--The word "Superman," which designates a type of man that
would be one of nature's rarest and luckiest strokes, as opposed to
"modern" men, to "good" men, to Christians and other Nihilists,--a
word which in the mouth of Zarathustra, the annihilator of morality,
acquires a very profound meaning,--is understood almost everywhere, and
with perfect innocence, in the light of those values to which a flat
contradiction was made manifest in the figure of Zarathustra--that is
to say, as an "ideal" type, a higher kind of man, half "saint" and half
"genius." ... Other learned cattle have suspected me of Darwinism on
account of this word: even the "hero cult" of that great unconscious
and involuntary swindler, Carlyle,--a cult which I repudiated with
such roguish malice,--was recognised in my doctrine. Once, when I
whispered to a man that he would do better I to seek for the Superman
in a Cæsar Borgia than in a Parsifal, he could not believe his ears.
The fact that I am quite free from curiosity in regard to criticisms of
my books, more particularly when they appear in newspapers, will have
to be forgiven me. My friends and my publishers know this, and never
speak to me of such things. In one particular case, I once saw all the
sins that had been committed against a single book--it was _Beyond Good
and Evil;_ I could tell you a nice story about it. Is it possible that
the _National-Zeitung_--a Prussian paper (this comment is for the sake
of my foreign readers--for my own part, I beg to state, I read only _Le
Journal des Débats_)--really and seriously regarded the book as a "sign
of the times," or a genuine and typical example of Tory philosophy,[1]
for which the _Kreuz-Zeitung_ had not sufficient courage?...



2


This was said for the benefit of Germans: for everywhere else I have
my readers--all of them exceptionally intelligent men, characters that
have won their spurs and that have been reared in high offices and
superior duties; I have even real geniuses among my readers. In Vienna,
in St Petersburg, in Stockholm, in Copenhagen, in Paris, and New
York--I have been discovered everywhere: I have not yet been discovered
in Europe's flatland--Germany.... And, to make a confession, I rejoice
much more heartily over those who do not read me, over those who have
neither heard of my name nor of the word philosophy. But whithersoever
I go, here in Turin, for instance, every face brightens and softens
at the sight of me. A thing that has flattered me more than anything
else hitherto, is the fact that old market-women cannot rest until
they have picked out the sweetest of their grapes for me. To this
extent must a man be a philosopher.... It is not in vain that the
Poles are considered as the French among the Slavs. A charming Russian
lady will not be mistaken for a single moment concerning my origin.
I am not successful at being pompous, the most I can do is to appear
embarrassed.... I can think in German, I can feel in German--I can do
most things; but this is beyond my powers.... My old master Ritschl
went so far as to declare that I planned even my philological treatises
after the manner of a Parisian novelist--that I made them absurdly
thrilling. In Paris itself people are surprised at "_toutes mes audaces
et finesses_";--the words are Monsieur Taine's;--I fear that even in
the highest forms of the dithyramb, that salt will be found pervading
my work which never becomes insipid, which never becomes "German"--and
that is, wit.... I can do nought else. God help me! Amen.--We all know,
some of us even from experience, what a "long-ears" is. Well then, I
venture to assert that I have the smallest ears that have ever been
seen. This fact is not without interest to women--it seems to me they
feel that I understand them better!... I am essentially the anti-ass,
and on this account alone a monster in the world's history--in Greek,
and not only in Greek, I am the _Antichrist._



3


I am to a great extent aware of my privileges as a writer: in one
or two cases it has even been brought home to me how very much the
habitual > reading of my works "spoils" a man's taste. Other books
simply cannot be endured after mine, and least of all philosophical
ones. It is an incomparable distinction to cross the threshold of
this noble and subtle world--in order to do so one must certainly
not be a German; it is, in short, a distinction which one must have
deserved. He, however, who is related to me through loftiness of
will, experiences genuine raptures of understanding in my books:
for I swoop down from heights into which no bird has ever soared; I
know abysses into which no foot has ever slipped. People have told
me that it is impossible to lay down a book of mine--that I disturb
even the night's rest.... There is no prouder or at the same time more
subtle kind of books: they sometimes attain to the highest pinnacle
of earthly endeavour, cynicism; to capture their thoughts a man must
have the tenderest fingers as well as the most intrepid fists. Any
kind of spiritual decrepitude utterly excludes all intercourse with
them--even any kind of dyspepsia: a man must have no nerves, but he
must have a cheerful belly. Not only the poverty of a man's soul and
its stuffy air excludes all intercourse with them, but also, and to a
much greater degree, cowardice, uncleanliness, and secret intestinal
revengefulness; a word from my lips suffices to make the colour of
all evil instincts rush into a face. Among my acquaintances I have
a number of experimental subjects, in whom I see depicted all the
different, and instructively different, reactions which follow upon
a perusal of my works. Those who will have nothing to do with the
contents of my books, as for instance my so-called friends, assume an
"impersonal" tone concerning them: they wish me luck, and congratulate
me for having produced another work; they also declare that my writings
show progress, because they exhale a more cheerful spirit.... The
thoroughly vicious people, the "beautiful souls," the false from top to
toe, do not know in the least what to do with my books--consequently,
with the beautiful consistency of all beautiful souls, they regard
my work as beneath them. The cattle among my acquaintances, the mere
Germans, leave me to understand, if you please, that they are not
always of my opinion, though here and there they agree with me.... I
have heard this said even about _Zarathustra._ "Feminism," whether in
mankind or in man, is likewise a barrier to my writings; with it, no
one could ever enter into this labyrinth of fearless knowledge. To
this end, a man must never have spared himself, he must have been hard
in his habits, in order to be good-humoured and merry among a host of
inexorable truths. When I try to picture the character of a perfect
reader, I always imagine a monster of courage and curiosity, as well as
of suppleness, cunning, and prudence--in short, a born adventurer and
explorer. After all, I could not describe better than _Zarathustra_ has
done unto whom I really address myself: unto whom alone would he reveal
his riddle?

"Unto you, daring explorers and experimenters, and unto all who have
ever embarked beneath cunning sails upon terrible seas;

"Unto you who revel in riddles and in twilight, whose souls are lured
by flutes unto every treacherous abyss:

"For ye care not to grope your way along a thread with craven fingers;
and where ye are able to _guess,_ ye hate to _argue_?"



4


I will now pass just one or two general remarks about my _art of
style._ To communicate a state an inner tension of pathos by means
of signs, including the tempo of these signs,--that is the meaning of
every style; and in view of the fact that the multiplicity of inner
states in me is enormous, I am capable of many kinds of style--in
short, the most multifarious art of style that any man has ever had at
his disposal. Any style is _good_ which genuinely communicates an inner
condition, which does not blunder over the signs, over the tempo of the
signs, or over _moods_--all the laws of phrasing are the outcome of
representing moods artistically. Good style, in itself, is a piece of
sheer foolery, mere idealism, like "beauty in itself," for instance,
or "goodness in itself," or "the thing-in-itself." All this takes for
granted, of course, that there exist ears that can hear, and such men
as are capable and worthy of a like pathos, that those are not wanting
unto whom one may communicate one's self. Meanwhile my Zarathustra,
for instance, is still in quest of such people--alas! he will have to
seek a long while yet! A man must be worthy of listening to him....
And, until that time, there will be no one who will understand the art
that has been squandered in this book. No one has ever existed who has
had more novel, more strange, and purposely created art forms to fling
to the winds. The fact that such things were possible in the German
language still awaited proof; formerly, I myself would have denied
most emphatically that it was possible. Before my time people did not
know what could be done with the German language--what could be done
with language in general. The art of grand rhythm, of grand style in
periods, for expressing the tremendous fluctuations of sublime and
superhuman passion, was first discovered by me: with the dithyramb
entitled "The Seven Seals," which constitutes the last discourse of
the third part of _Zarathustra,_ I soared miles above all that which
heretofore has been called poetry.



5


The fact that the voice which speaks in my works is that of a
psychologist who has not his peer, is perhaps the first conclusion
at which a good reader will arrive--a reader such as I deserve, and
one who reads me just as the good old philologists used to read their
Horace. Those propositions about which all the world is fundamentally
agreed--not to speak of fashionable philosophy, of moralists and
other empty-headed and cabbage-brained people--are to me but ingenuous
blunders: for instance, the belief that "altruistic" and "egoistic";
are opposites, while all the time the "ego" itself is merely a "supreme
swindle," an "ideal." ... There are no such things as egoistic or
altruistic actions: both concepts are psychological nonsense. Or
the proposition that "man pursues happiness"; or the proposition
that "happiness is the reward of virtue." ... Or the proposition
that "pleasure and pain are opposites." ... Morality, the Circe of
mankind, has falsified everything psychological, root and branch--it
has demoralised everything, even to the terribly nonsensical point
of calling love "unselfish." A man must first be firmly poised, he
must stand securely on his two legs, otherwise he cannot love at
all. This indeed the girls know only too well: they don't care two
pins about unselfish and merely objective men.... May I venture to
suggest, incidentally, that I know women? This knowledge is part of my
Dionysian patrimony. Who knows? maybe I am the first psychologist of
the eternally feminine. Women all like me.... But that's an old story:
save, of course, the abortions among them, the emancipated ones, those
who lack the where-withal to have children. Thank goodness I am not
willing to let myself be torn to pieces! the perfect woman tears you
to pieces when she loves you: I know these amiable Mænads.... Oh! what
a dangerous, creeping, subterranean little beast of prey she is! And
so agreeable withal! ... A little woman, pursuing her vengeance, would
force open even the iron gates of Fate itself. Woman is incalculably
more wicked than man, she is also cleverer. Goodness in a woman is
already a sign of _degeneration._ All cases of "beautiful souls" in
women may be traced to a faulty physiological condition--but I go no
further, lest I should become medicynical. The struggle for equal
rights is even a symptom of disease; every doctor knows this. The more
womanly a woman is, the more she fights tooth and nail against rights
in general: the natural order of things, the eternal war between the
sexes, assigns to her by far the foremost rank. Have people had ears
to hear my definition of love? It is the only definition worthy of a
philosopher. Love, in its means, is war; in its foundation, it is the
mortal hatred of the sexes. Have you heard my reply to the question
how a woman can be cured, "saved" in fact?--Give her a child! A woman
needs children, man is always only a means, thus spake Zarathustra.
"The emancipation of women,"--this is the instinctive hatred of
physiologically botched--that is to say, barren--women for those of
their sisters who are well constituted: the fight against "man" is
always only a means, a pretext, a piece of strategy. By trying to rise
to "Woman _per se_," to "Higher Woman," to the "Ideal Woman," all they
wish to do is to lower the general level of women's rank: and there are
no more certain means to this end than university education, trousers,
and the rights of voting cattle. Truth to tell, the emancipated are
the anarchists in the "eternally feminine" world, the physiological
mishaps, the most deep-rooted instinct of whom is revenge. A whole
species of the most malicious "idealism"--which, by the bye, also
manifests itself in men, in Henrik Ibsen for instance, that typical
old maid--whose object is to poison the clean conscience, the natural
spirit, of sexual love.... And in order to leave no doubt in your minds
in regard to my opinion, which, on this matter, is as honest as it
is severe, I will reveal to you one more clause out of my moral code
against vice--with the word "vice" I combat every kind of! opposition
to Nature, or, if you prefer fine words, idealism. The clause reads:
"Preaching of chastity is a public incitement to unnatural practices.
All depreciation of the sexual life, all the sullying of it by means
of the concept 'impure,' is the essential crime against Life--is the
essential crime against the Holy Spirit of Life."

In order to give you some idea of myself as a psychologist, let me
take this curious piece of psychological analysis out of the book
_Beyond Good and Evil,_ in which it appears. I forbid, by the bye, any
guessing as to whom I am describing in this passage. "The genius of
the heart, as that great anchorite possesses it, the divine tempter
and born Pied Piper of consciences, whose voice knows how to sink into
the inmost depths of every soul, who neither utters a word nor casts a
glance, in which some seductive motive or trick does not lie: a part
of whose masterliness is that he understands the art of seeming--not
what he is, but that which will place a fresh constraint upon his
followers to press ever more closely upon him, to follow him ever more
enthusiastically and whole-heartedly.... The genius of the heart,
which makes all loud and self-conceited things hold their tongues and
lend their ears, which polishes all rough souls and makes them taste a
new longing--to lie placid as a mirror, that the deep heavens may be
reflected in them.... The genius of the heart which teaches the clumsy
and too hasty hand to hesitate and grasp more tenderly; which scents
the hidden and forgotten treasure, the pearl of goodness and sweet
spirituality, beneath thick black ice, and is a divining rod for every
grain of gold, long buried and imprisoned in heaps of mud and sand....
The genius of the heart, from contact with which every man goes away
richer, not 'blessed' and overcome, not as though favoured and crushed
by the good things of others; but richer in himself, fresher to
himself than before, opened up, breathed upon and sounded by a thawing
wind; more uncertain, perhaps, more delicate, more fragile, more
bruised; but full of hopes which as yet lack names, full of a new will
and striving, full of a new unwillingness and counter-striving." ...


[Footnote 1: _Junker-Philosophie._ The landed proprietors constitute
the dominating class in Prussia, and it is from this class that all
officers and higher officials are drawn. The _Kreuz-Zeitung_ is the
organ of the Junker party.--TR.]




"THE BIRTH Of TRAGEDY"



1


In order to be fair to the _Birth of Tragedy_ (1872) it is necessary
to forget a few things. It created a sensation and even fascinated by
means of its mistakes--by means of its application to Wagnerism, as
if the latter were the sign of an ascending tendency. On that account
alone, this treatise was an event in Wagner's life: thenceforward
great hopes surrounded the name of Wagner. Even to this day, people
remind me, sometimes in the middle of _Parsifal,_ that it rests on
my conscience if the opinion, that this movement is of great value
to culture, at length became prevalent I have often seen the book
quoted as "The Second Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music":
people had ears only for new formulæ for Wagner's art, his object
and his mission--and in this way the real hidden value of the book
was overlooked. "Hellenism and Pessimism"--this would have been a
less equivocal title, seeing that the book contains the first attempt
at showing how the Greeks succeeded in disposing: of pessimism--in
what manner they overcame it. ... Tragedy itself is the proof of
the fact that the Greeks were not pessimists: Schopenhauer blundered
here as he blundered in everything else.--Regarded impartially,
_The Birth of Tragedy_ is a book quite strange to its age: no one
would dream that it was begun in the thunder of the battle of Wörth.
I thought out these problems on cold September nights beneath the
walls of Metz, in the midst of my duties as nurse to the wounded; it
would be easier to think that it was written fifty years earlier. Its
attitude towards politics is one of indifference,--"un-German,"[1]
as people would say to-day,--it smells offensively of Hegel; only in
one or two formulæ is it infected with the bitter odour of corpses
which is peculiar to Schopenhauer. An idea--the antagonism of the two
concepts Dionysian and Apollonian--is translated into metaphysics;
history itself is depicted as the development of this idea; in tragedy
this antithesis has become unity; from this standpoint things which
theretofore had never been face to face are suddenly confronted, and
understood and illuminated by each other.... Opera and revolution,
for instance.... The two decisive innovations in the book are, first,
the comprehension of the Dionysian phenomenon among the Greeks--it
provides the first psychological analysis of this phenomenon, and
sees in it the single root of all Greek art; and, secondly, the
comprehension of Socraticism--Socrates being presented for the first
time as the instrument of Greek dissolution, as a typical decadent.
"Reason" _versus_ Instinct. "Reason" at any cost, as a dangerous,
life-undermining force. The whole book is profoundly and politely
silent concerning Christianity: the latter is neither Apollonian nor
Dionysian; it denies all æsthetic values, which are the only values
that _The Birth of Tragedy_ recognises. Christianity is most profoundly
nihilistic, whereas in the Dionysian symbol, the most extreme limits of
a yea-saying attitude to life are attained. In one part of the book the
Christian priesthood is referred to as a "perfidious order of goblins,"
as "subterraneans."

This start of mine was remarkable beyond measure. As a confirmation of
my inmost personal experience I had discovered the only example of this
fact that history possesses,--with this I was the first to understand
the amazing Dionysian phenomenon. At the same time, by recognising
Socrates as a decadent, I proved most conclusively that the certainty
of my psychological grasp of things ran very little risk at the hands
of any sort of moral idiosyncrasy: to regard morality itself as a
symptom of degeneration is an innovation, a unique event of the first
order in the history of knowledge. How high I had soared above the
pitifully foolish gabble about Optimism and Pessimism with my two new
doctrines! I was the first to see the actual contrast: the degenerate
instinct which turns upon life with a subterranean lust of vengeance
(Christianity, Schopenhauer's philosophy, and in some respects too
even Plato's philosophy--in short, the whole of idealism in its typical
forms), as opposed to a formula of the highest yea-saying to life,
born of an abundance and a superabundance of life--a I yea-saying free
from all reserve, applying even to suffering, and guilt, and all that
is questionable and strange in existence.... This last, most joyous,
most exuberant and exultant yea to life, is not only the highest,
but also the profoundest conception, and one which is most strictly
confirmed and supported by truth and science. Nothing that exists must
be suppressed, nothing can be dispensed with. Those aspects of life
which Christians and other Nihilists reject, belong to an incalculably
higher order in the hierarchy of values, than that which the instinct
of degeneration calls good, and _may_ call good. In order to understand
this, a certain courage is necessary, and, as a prerequisite of this,
a certain superfluity of strength: for a man can approach only as near
to truth as he has the courage to advance--that is to say, everything
depends strictly upon the measure of his strength. Knowledge, and
the affirmation of reality, are just as necessary to the strong man
as cowardice, the flight from reality--in fact, the "ideal"--are
necessary to the weak inspired by weakness.... These people are not
at liberty to "know,"--decadents stand in need of lies,--it is one of
their self-preservative measures. He who not only understands the word
"Dionysian," but understands _himself_ in that term, does not require
any refutation of Plato, or of Christianity, or of Schopenhauer--for
his nose _scents decomposition._



3


The extent to which I had by means of these doctrines discovered the
idea of "tragedy," the ultimate explanation of what the psychology of
tragedy is, I discussed finally in _The Twilight of the Idols_ (Aph.
5, part 10).... "The saying of yea to life, and even to its weirdest
and most difficult problems: the will to life rejoicing at its own
infinite vitality in the sacrifice of its highest types--that is what I
called Dionysian, that is what I meant as the bridge to the psychology
of the tragic poet. Not to cast out terror and pity, or to purge one's
self of dangerous passion by discharging it with vehemence,--this was
Aristotle's[2] misunderstanding of it,--but to be far beyond terror
and pity and to be the eternal lust of Becoming itself--that lust
which also involves the joy of destruction." ... In this sense I have
the right to regard myself as the first _tragic philosopher_--that is
to say, the most extreme antithesis and antipodes of a pessimistic
philosopher. Before my time no such thing existed as this translation
of the Dionysian phenomenon into philosophic emotion: tragic wisdom was
lacking; in vain have I sought for signs of it even among the great
Greeks in philosophy--those belonging to the two centuries before
Socrates. I still remained a little doubtful about Heraclitus, in whose
presence, alone, I felt warmer and more at ease than anywhere else.
The yea-saying to the impermanence and annihilation of things, which
is the decisive feature of a Dionysian philosophy; the yea-saying to
contradiction and war, the postulation of Becoming, together with the
radical rejection even of the concept _Being_-- in all these things, at
all events, I must recognise him who has come nearest to me in thought
hither to. The doctrine of the "Eternal Recurrence"--that is to say,
of the absolute and eternal repetition of all things in periodical
cycles--this doctrine of Zarathustra's might, it is true, have been
taught before. In any case, the Stoics, who derived nearly all their
fundamental ideas from Heraclitus, show traces of it.

A tremendous hope finds expression in this work. After all, I have
absolutely no reason to renounce the hope for a Dionysian future of
music. Let us look a century ahead, and let us suppose that my attempt
to destroy two millenniums of hostility to Nature and of the violation
of humanity be crowned with success That new party of life-advocates,
which will undertake the greatest of all tasks, the elevation and
perfection of mankind, as well as the relentless destruction of all
degenerate and parasitical elements, will make that _superabundance
of life_ on earth once more possible, out of which the Dionysian
state will perforce arise again. I promise the advent of a tragic
age: the highest art in the saying of yea to life, "tragedy," will be
born again when mankind has the knowledge of the hardest, but most
necessary of wars, behind it, without, however, suffering from that
knowledge.... A psychologist might add that what I heard in Wagnerian
music in my youth and early manhood had nothing whatsoever to do with
Wagner; that when I described Dionysian music, I described merely
what _I_ personally had heard--that I was compelled instinctively to
translate and transfigure everything into the new spirit which filled
my breast. A proof of this, and as strong a proof as you could have,
is my essay, _Wagner in Bayreuth_: in all its decisive psychological
passages I am the only person concerned--without any hesitation you may
read my name or the word "Zarathustra" wherever the text contains the
name of Wagner. The whole panorama of the _dithyrambic_ artist is the
representation of the already existing author of _Zarathustra,_ and
it is drawn with an abysmal depth which does not even once come into
contact with the real Wagner. Wagner himself had a notion of the truth;
he did not recognise himself in the essay.--In this way, "the idea of
Bayreuth" was changed into something which to those who are acquainted
with my _Zarathustra_ will be no riddle--that is to say, into the
Great Noon when the highest of the elect will consecrate themselves
for the greatest of all duties--who knows? the vision of a feast which
I may live to see.... The pathos of the first few pages is universal
history; the look which is discussed on page 105[3] of the book, is the
actual look of _Zarathustra;_ Wagner, Bayreuth, the whole of this petty
German wretchedness, is a cloud upon which an infinite Fata Morgana
of the future is reflected. Even from the psychological standpoint,
all the decisive traits in my character are introduced into Wagner's
nature--the juxtaposition of the most brilliant and most fatal forces,
a Will to Power such as no man has ever possessed--inexorable bravery
in matters spiritual, an unlimited power of learning unaccompanied by
depressed powers for action. Everything in this essay is a prophecy:
the proximity of the resurrection of the Greek spirit, the need of men
who will be counter-Alexanders, who will once more tie the Gordian knot
of Greek culture, after it has been cut. Listen to the world-historic
accent with which the concept "sense for the tragic" is introduced
on page 180: there are little else but world-historic accents in
this essay. This is the strangest kind of "objectivity" that ever
existed: my absolute certainty in regard to what I _am,_ projected
itself into any chance reality--truth about myself was voiced from out
appalling depths. On pages 174 and 175 the style of _Zarathustra_ is
described and foretold with incisive certainty, and no more magnificent
expression will ever be found than that on pages 144-147 for the event
for which _Zarathustra_ stands--that prodigious act of the purification
and consecration of mankind.


[Footnote 1: Those Germans who, like Nietzsche or Goethe, recognised
that politics constituted a danger to culture, and who appreciated the
literature of maturer cultures, such as that of France, are called
_un-deutsch_ (un-German) by Imperialistic Germans.--Tr.]

[Footnote 2: Aristotle's _Poetics_, c. vi.--Tr.]

[Footnote 3: This number and those which follow refer to _Thoughts out
of Season,_ Part I. in this edition of Nietzsche's Works.--TR.]




"THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON"



1


The four essays composing the _Thoughts out of Season_ are thoroughly
warlike in tone. They prove that I was no mere dreamer, that I delight
in drawing the sword--and perhaps, also, that my wrist is dangerously
supple. The first onslaught (1873) was directed against German culture,
upon which I looked down even at that time with unmitigated contempt
Without either sense, substance, or goal, it was simply "public
opinion." There could be no more dangerous misunderstanding than to
suppose that Germany's success at arms proved anything in favour of
German culture--and still less the triumph of this culture; over
that of France. The second essay (1874) brings to light that which
is dangerous, that which corrodes and poisons life in our manner of
pursuing scientific study: Life is diseased, thanks to this dehumanised
piece of clockwork and mechanism, thanks to the "impersonality" of
the workman, 1 and the false economy of the "division of labour." The
object, which is culture, is lost sight of: modern scientific activity
as a means thereto simply produces barbarism. In this treatise, the
"historical sense," of which this century is so proud, is for the first
time recognised as sickness, as a typical symptom of decay. In the
third and fourth essays, a sign-post is set up pointing to a higher
concept of culture, to a re-establishment of the notion "culture";
and two pictures of the hardest self-love and self-discipline are
presented, two essentially un-modern types, full of the most sovereign
contempt for all that which lay around them and was called "Empire,"
"Culture," "Christianity," "Bismarck," and "Success,"--these two types
were Schopenhauer and Wagner, _or,_ in a word, Nietzsche....



2


Of these four attacks, the first met with extraordinary success. The
stir which it created was in every way gorgeous. I had put my finger
on the vulnerable spot of a triumphant nation--I had told it that its
victory was not a red-letter day for culture, but, perhaps, something
very different. The reply rang out from all sides, and certainly not
only from old friends of David Strauss, whom I had made ridiculous
as the type of a German Philistine of Culture and a man of smug
self-content--in short, as the author of that suburban gospel of his,
called _The Old and the New Faith_ (the term "Philistine of Culture"
passed into the current language of Germany after the appearance of my
book). These old friends, whose vanity as Würtembergians and Swabians
I had deeply wounded in regarding their unique animal, their bird
of Paradise, as a trifle comic, replied to me as ingenuously and as
grossly as I could have wished. The Prussian replies were smarter; they
contained more "Prussian blue." The most disreputable attitude was
assumed by a Leipzig paper, the egregious _Grentzboten_; and it cost me
some pains to prevent my indignant friends in Bâle from taking action
against it. Only a few old gentlemen decided in my favour, and for
very diverse and sometimes unaccountable reasons. Among them was one,
Ewald of Göttingen, who made it clear that my attack on Strauss had
been deadly. There was also the Hegelian, Bruno Bauer, who from that
time became one of my most attentive readers. In his later years he
liked to refer to me, when, for instance, he wanted to give Herr von
Treitschke, the Prussian Historiographer, a hint as to where he could
obtain information about the notion "Culture," of which he (Herr von
T.) had completely lost sight. The weightiest and longest notice of my
book and its author appeared in Würzburg, and was written by Professor
Hoffmann, an old pupil of the philosopher von Baader. The essays made
him foresee a great future for me, namely, that of bringing about a
sort of crisis and decisive turning-point in the problem of atheism,
of which he recognised in me the most instinctive and most radical
advocate. It was atheism that had drawn me to Schopenhauer. The review
which received by far the most attention, and which excited the most
bitterness, was an extraordinarily powerful and plucky appreciation of
my work by Carl Hillebrand, a man who was usually so mild, and the last
_humane_ German who knew how to wield a pen. The article appeared in
the _Augsburg Gazette,_ and it can be read to-day, couched in rather
more cautious language, among his collected essays. In it my work was
referred to as an event, as a decisive turning-point, as the first sign
of an awakening, as an excellent symptom, and as an actual revival
of German earnestness and of German passion in things spiritual.
Hillebrand could speak only in the terms of the highest respect, of
the form of my book, of its consummate taste, of its perfect tact in
discriminating between persons and causes: he characterised it as the
best polemical work in the German language,--the best performance in
the art of polemics, which for Germans is so dangerous and so strongly
to be deprecated. Besides confirming my standpoint, he laid even
greater stress upon what I had dared to say about the deterioration of
language in Germany (nowadays writers assume the airs of Purists[1]
and can no longer even construct a sentence); sharing my contempt for
the literary stars of this nation, he concluded by expressing his
admiration for my courage--that "greatest courage of all which places
the very favourites of the people in the dock." ... The after-effects
of this essay of mine proved invaluable to me in my life. No one has
ever tried to meddle with me since. People are silent. In Germany
I am treated with gloomy caution: for years I have rejoiced in the
privilege of such absolute freedom of speech, as no one nowadays,
least of all in the "Empire," has enough liberty to claim. My paradise
is "in the shadow of my sword." At bottom all I had done was to put
one of Stendhal's maxims into practice: he advises one to make one's
entrance into society by means of a duel. And how well I had chosen my
opponent!--the foremost free-thinker of Germany. As a matter of fact,
quite a novel kind of free thought found its expression in this way:
up to the present nothing has been more strange and more foreign to my
blood than the whole of that European and American species known as
_litres penseurs._ Incorrigible blockheads and clowns of "modern ideas"
that they are, I feel much more profoundly at variance with them than
with any one of their adversaries. They also wish to "improve" mankind,
after their own fashion--that is to say, in their own image; against
that which I stand for and desire, they would wage an implacable war,
if only they understood it; the whole gang of them still believe in an
"ideal." ... I am the first _Immoralist_.



3


I should not like to say that the last two essays in the _Thoughts
out of Season,_ associated with the names of Schopenhauer and Wagner
respectively, serve any special purpose in throwing light upon these
two cases, or in formulating their psychological problems. This of
course does not apply to a few details. Thus, for instance, in the
second of the two essays, with a profound certainty of instinct I
already characterised the elementary factor in Wagner's nature as a
theatrical talent which in all his means and inspirations only draws
its final conclusions. At bottom, my desire in this essay was to do
something very different from writing psychology: an unprecedented
educational problem, a new understanding of self-discipline and
self-defence carried to the point of hardness, a road to greatness
and to world-historic duties, yearned to find expression. Roughly
speaking, I seized two famous and, theretofore, completely undefined
types by the forelock, after the manner in which one seizes
opportunities, simply in order to speak my mind on certain questions,
in order to have a few more formulas, signs, and means of expression
at my disposal. Indeed I actually suggest this, with most unearthly
sagacity, on page 183 of _Schopenhauer as Educator._ Plato made use
of Socrates in the same way--that is to say, as a cipher for Plato.
Now that, from some distance, I can look back upon the conditions of
which these essays are the testimony, I would be loth to deny that they
refer simply to me. The essay _Wagner in Bayreuth_ is a vision of my
own future; on the other hand, my most secret history, my development,
is written down in _Schopenhauer as Educator._ But, above all, the
_vow_ I made I What I am to-day, the place I now hold--at a height from
which I speak no longer with words but with thunderbolts!--oh, how
far I was from all this in those days! But I saw the land--I did not
deceive myself for one moment as to the way, the sea, the danger--_and_
success! The great calm in promising, this happy prospect of a future
which must not remain only a promise!--In this book every word has
been lived, profoundly and intimately; the most painful things are not
lacking in it; it contains words which are positively running with
blood. But a wind of great freedom blows over the whole; even its
wounds do not constitute an objection. As to what I understand by being
a philosopher,--that is to say, a terrible explosive in the presence
of which everything is in danger; as to how I sever my idea of the
philosopher by miles from that other idea of him which includes even a
Kant, not to speak of the academic "ruminators" and other professors of
philosophy,--concerning all these things this essay provides invaluable
information, even granting that at bottom, it is not "Schopenhauer as
Educator" but "Nietzsche as Educator," who speaks his sentiments in
it. Considering that, in those days, my trade was that of a scholar,
and perhaps, also, that I understood my trade, the piece of austere
scholar psychology which suddenly makes its appearance in this essay is
not without importance: it expresses the feeling of distance, and my
profound certainty regarding what was my real life-task, and what were
merely means, intervals, and accessory work to me. My wisdom consists
in my having been many things, and in many places, in order to become
one thing--in order to be able to attain to one thing. It was part of
my fate to be a scholar for a while.


[Footnote 1: The Purists constitute a definite body in Germany, which
is called the _Deutscher Sprach-Verein._ Their object is to banish
every foreign word from the language, and they carry this process of
ostracism even into the domain of the menu, where their efforts at
rendering the meaning of French dishes are extremely comical. Strange
to say, their principal organ, and their other publications, are by
no means free either from solecisms or faults of style, and it is
doubtless to this curious anomaly that Nietzsche here refers.--TR.]




"HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN"



1


_Human all-too-Human,_ with its two sequels, is the memorial of a
crisis. It is called a book for free spirits: almost every sentence in
it is the expression of a triumph--by means of it I purged myself of
everything in me which was foreign to my nature. Idealism is foreign
to me: the title of the book means: "Where ye see ideal things I
see--human, alas! all-too-human things!" ... I know men better. The
word "free spirit" in this book must not be understood as anything
else than a spirit that has become free, that has once more taken
possession of itself. My tone, the pitch of my voice, has completely
changed; the book will be thought clever, cool, and at times both
hard and scornful. A certain spirituality, of noble taste, seems to
be ever struggling to dominate a passionate torrent at its feet. In
this respect there is some sense in the fact that it was the hundredth
anniversary of Voltaire's death that served, so to speak, as an excuse
for the publication of the book as early as 1878. For Voltaire, as the
opposite of every one who wrote after him, was above all a grandee of
the intellect; precisely what I am also. The name of Voltaire on one
of my writings--that was verily a step forward--in my direction....
Looking into this book a little more closely, you perceive a pitiless
spirit who knows all the secret hiding-places in which ideals are wont
to skulk--where they find their dungeons, and, as it were, their last
refuge. With a torch in my hand, the light of which is not by any
means a flickering one, I illuminate this nether world with beams that
cut like blades. It is war, but war without powder and smoke, without
warlike attitudes, without pathos and contorted limbs--all these things
would still be "idealism." One error after the other is quietly laid
upon ice; the ideal is not refuted,--it freezes. Here, for instance,
"genius" freezes; round the corner the "saint" freezes; under a thick
icicle the "hero" freezes; and in the end "faith" itself freezes.
So-called "conviction" and also "pity" are considerably cooled--and
almost everywhere the "thing in itself" is freezing to death.



2


This book was begun during the first musical festival at Bayreuth; a
feeling of profound strangeness towards everything that surrounded
me there, is one of its first conditions. He who has any notion of
the visions which even at that time had flitted across my path, will
be able to guess what I felt when one day I came to my senses in
Bayreuth. It was just as if I had been dreaming. Where on earth was I?
I recognised nothing that I saw; I scarcely recognised Wagner. It was
in vain that I called up reminiscences. Tribschen--remote island of
bliss: not the shadow of a resemblance! The incomparable days devoted
to the laying of the first stone, the small group of the initiated
who celebrated them, and who were far from lacking fingers for the
handling of delicate things: not the shadow of a resemblance! _What
had happened?_--Wagner had been translated into German! The Wagnerite
had become master of Wagner!_--German_ art! the German master! German
beer!... We who know only too well the kind of refined artists and
cosmopolitanism in taste, to which alone Wagner's art can appeal, were
beside ourselves at the sight of Wagner bedecked with German virtues.
I think I know the Wagnerite, I have experienced three generations
of them, from Brendel of blessed memory, who confounded Wagner with
Hegel, to the "idealists" of the _Bayreuth Gazette,_ who confound
Wagner with themselves,--I have been the recipient of every kind of
confession about Wagner, from "beautiful souls." My kingdom for just
one intelligent word I--In very truth, a blood-curdling company! Nohl,
Pohl, and _Kohl_[1] and others of their kidney to infinity! There
was not a single abortion that was lacking among them--no, not even
the anti-Semite.--Poor Wagner! Into whose hands had he fallen? If
only he had gone into a herd of swine! But among Germans! Some day,
for the edification of posterity, one ought really to have a genuine
Bayreuthian stuffed, or, better still, preserved in spirit,--for
it is precisely spirit that is lacking in this quarter,--with this
inscription at the foot of the jar: "A sample of the spirit whereon
the 'German Empire' was founded." ... But enough! In the middle of
the festivities I suddenly packed my trunk and left the place for a
few weeks, despite the fact that a charming Parisian lady sought to
comfort me; I excused myself to Wagner simply by means of a fatalistic
telegram. In a little spot called Klingenbrunn, deeply buried in the
recesses of the Bohmerwald, I carried my melancholy and my contempt of
Germans about with me like an illness--and, from time to time, under
the general title of "The Plough-share," I wrote a sentence or two down
in my note-book, nothing but severe psychological stuff, which it is
possible may have found its way into _Human, all-too-Human._



3


That which had taken place in me, then, was not only a breach with
Wagner--I was suffering from a general aberration of my instincts,
of which a mere isolated blunder, whether it were Wagner or my
professorship at Bâle, was nothing more than a symptom. I was seized
with a fit of impatience with myself; I saw that it was high time that
I should turn my thoughts upon my own lot. In a trice I realised, with
appalling clearness, how much time had already been squandered--how
futile and how senseless my whole existence as a philologist appeared
by the side of my life-task. I was ashamed of this false modesty....
Ten years were behind me, during which, to tell the truth, the
nourishment of my spirit had been at a standstill, during which I had
added not a single useful fragment to my knowledge, and had forgotten
countless things in the pursuit of a hotch-potch of dry-as-dust
scholarship. To crawl with meticulous care and short-sighted eyes
through old Greek metricians--that is what I had come to!... Moved to
pity I saw myself quite thin, quite emaciated: realities were only too
plainly absent from my stock of knowledge, and what the "idealities"
were worth the devil alone knew! A positively burning thirst overcame
me: and from that time forward I have done literally nothing else than
study physiology, medicine, and natural science--I even returned to
the actual study of history only when my life-task compelled me to. It
was at that time, too, that I first divined the relation between an
instinctively repulsive occupation, a so-called vocation, which is the
last thing to which one is "called" and that need of lulling a feeling
of emptiness and hunger, by means of an art which is a narcotic--by
means of Wagner's art, for instance. After looking carefully about
me, I have discovered that a large number of young men are all in the
same state of distress: one kind of unnatural practice perforce leads
to another. In Germany, or rather, to avoid all ambiguity, in the
Empire,[2] only too many are condemned to determine their choice too
soon, and then to pine away beneath a burden that they can no longer
throw off.... Such creatures crave for Wagner as for an opiate,--they
are thus able to forget themselves, to be rid of themselves for a
moment.... What am I saying!--for five or six hours.



4


At this time my instincts turned resolutely against any further
yielding or following on my part, and any further misunderstanding
of myself. Every kind of life, the most unfavourable circumstances,
illness, poverty--anything seemed to me preferable to that undignified
"selfishness" into which I had fallen; in the first place, thanks to my
ignorance and youth, and in which I had afterwards remained owing to
laziness--the so-called "sense of duty." At this juncture there came to
my help, in a way that I cannot sufficiently admire, and precisely at
the right time, that evil heritage which I derive from my father's side
of the family, and which, at bottom, is no more than a predisposition
to die young. Illness slowly liberated me from the toils, it spared me
any sort of sudden breach, any sort of violent and offensive step. At
that time I lost not a particle of the good will of others, but rather
added to my store. Illness likewise gave me the right completely to
reverse my mode of life; it not only allowed, it actually commanded,
me to forget; it bestowed upon me the necessity of lying still, of
having leisure, of waiting, and of exercising patience.... But all
this means thinking!... The state of my eyes alone put an end to all
book-wormishness, or, in plain English--philology: I was thus delivered
from books; for years I ceased from reading, and this was the greatest
boon I ever conferred upon myself! That nethermost self, which was,
as it were, entombed, and which had grown dumb because it had been
forced to listen perpetually to other selves (for that is what reading
means!), slowly awakened; at first it was shy and doubtful, but at
last it _spoke again_ Never have I rejoiced more over my condition
than during the sickest and most painful moments of my life. You have
only to examine _The Dawn of Day,_ or, perhaps, _The Wanderer and
his Shadow,_[3] in order to understand what this "return to myself"
actually meant: in itself it was the highest kind of recovery!... My
cure was simply the result of it.



5


_Human, all-too-Human,_ this monument of a course of vigorous
self-discipline, by means of which I put an abrupt end to all the
"Superior Bunkum," "Idealism," "Beautiful Feelings," and other
effeminacies that had percolated into my being, was written principally
in Sorrento; it was finished and given definite shape during a winter
at Bâle, under conditions far less favourable than those in Sorrento.
Truth to tell, it was Peter Gast, at that time a student at the
University of Bâle, and a devoted friend of mine, who was responsible
for the book. With my head wrapped in bandages, and extremely painful,
I dictated while he wrote and corrected as he went along--to be
accurate, he was the real composer, whereas I was only the author.
When the completed book ultimately reached me,--to the great surprise
of the serious invalid I then was,--I sent, among others, two copies
to Bayreuth. Thanks to a miraculous flash of intelligence on the part
of chance, there reached me precisely at the same time a splendid copy
of the _Parsifal_ text, with the following inscription from Wagner's
pen: "To his dear friend Friedrich Nietzsche, from Richard Wagner,
Ecclesiastical Councillor." At this crossing of the two books I seemed
to hear an ominous note. Did it not sound as if two swords had crossed?
At all events we both felt this was so, for each of us remained silent.
At about this time the first Bayreuth Pamphlets appeared: and I then
understood the move on my part for which it was high time. Incredible!
Wagner had become pious.



6


My attitude to myself at that time (1876), and the unearthly certitude
with which I grasped my life-task and all its world-historic
consequences, is well revealed throughout the book, but more
particularly in one very significant passage, despite the fact that,
with my instinctive cunning, I once more circumvented the use of
the little word "I,"--not however, this time, in order to shed
world-historic glory on the names of Schopenhauer and Wagner, but on
that of another of my friends, the excellent Dr. Paul Rée--fortunately
much too acute a creature to be deceived--others were less subtle.
Among my readers I have a number of hopeless people, the typical
German professor for instance, who can always be recognised from the
fact that, judging from the passage in question, he feels compelled to
regard the whole book as a sort of superior Realism. As a matter of
fact it contradicts five or six of my friend's utterances: only read
the introduction to _The Genealogy of Morals_ on this question.--The
passage above referred to reads: "What, after all, is the principal
axiom to which the boldest and coldest thinker, the author of the
book "_On the Origin of Moral Sensations_" (read Nietzsche, the first
Immoralist), "has attained by means of his incisive and decisive
analysis of human actions? 'The moral man,' he says is no nearer to the
intelligible (metaphysical) world than is the physical man, for there
is no intelligible world.' This theory, hardened and sharpened under
the hammer-blow of historical knowledge" (read _The Transvaluation
of all Values_), "may some time or other, perhaps in some future
period,--1890!--serve as the axe which is applied to the root of the
'metaphysical need' of man,--whether more as a blessing than a curse to
the general welfare it is not easy to say; but in any case as a theory
with the most important consequences, at once fruitful and terrible,
and looking into the world with that Janus-face which all great
knowledge possesses."[4]


[Footnote 1: Nohl and Pohl were both writers on music; Kohl, however,
which literally means cabbage, is a slang expression, denoting superior
nonsense.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: Needless to say, Nietzsche distinguishes between
Bismarckian Germany and that other Germany--Austria, Switzerland, and
the Baltic Provinces--where the German language is also spoken.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: _Human, all-too-Human,_ Part II. in this edition.--TR.]

[Footnote 4: _Human, all-too-Human,_ vol. i. Aph. 37.]




"THE DAWN OF DAY:

THOUGHTS ABOUT MORALITY AS A PREJUDICE"



1


With this book I open my campaign against morality. Not that it is at
all redolent of powder--you will find quite other and much nicer smells
in it, provided that you have any keenness in your nostrils. There
is nothing either of light or of heavy artillery in its composition,
and if its general end be a negative one, its means are not so--means
out of which the end follows like a logical conclusion, _not_ like a
cannon-shot. And if the reader takes leave of this book with a feeling
of timid caution in regard to everything which has hitherto been
honoured and even worshipped under the name of morality, it does not
alter the fact that there is not one negative word, not one attack,
and not one single piece of malice in the whole work--on the contrary,
it lies in the sunshine, smooth and happy, like a marine animal,
basking in the sun between two rocks. For, after all, I was this marine
animal: almost every sentence in the book was thought out, or rather
_caught,_ among that medley of rocks in the neighbourhood of Genoa,
where I lived quite alone, and exchanged secrets with the ocean. Even
to this day, when by chance I happen to turn over the leaves of this
book, almost every sentence seems to me like a hook by means of which I
draw something incomparable out of the depths; its whole skin quivers
with delicate shudders of recollection. This book is conspicuous for no
little art in gently catching things which whisk rapidly and silently
away, moments which I call godlike lizards--not with the cruelty of
that young Greek god who simply transfixed the poor little beast;
but nevertheless with something pointed--with a pen. "There are so
many dawns which have not yet shed their light"--this Indian maxim is
written over the doorway of this book. Where does its author seek that
new morning, that delicate red, as yet undiscovered, with which another
day--ah! a whole series of days, a whole world of new days!--will
begin? In the _Transvaluation of all Values,_ in an emancipation from
all moral values, in a saying of yea, and in an attitude of trust, to
all that which hitherto has been forbidden, despised, and damned. This
yea-saying book projects its light, its love, its tenderness, over all
evil things, it restores to them their soul, their clear conscience,
and their superior right and privilege to exist on earth. Morality is
not assailed, it simply ceases to be considered. This book closes with
the word "or?"--it is the only book which closes with an "or?".



2


My life-task is to prepare for humanity one supreme moment in which it
can come to its senses, a Great Noon in which it will turn its gaze
backwards and forwards, in which it will step from under the yoke
of accident and of priests, and for the first time set the question
of the Why and Wherefore of humanity as a whole--this life-task
naturally follows out of the conviction that mankind does _not_ get
on the right road of its own accord, that it is by no means divinely
ruled, but rather that it is precisely under the cover of its most
holy valuations that the instinct of negation, of corruption, and of
degeneration has held such a seductive sway. The question concerning
the origin of moral valuations is therefore a matter of the highest
importance to me because it determines the future of mankind. The
demand made upon us to believe that everything is really in the best
hands, that a certain book, the Bible, gives us the definite and
comforting assurance that there is a Providence that wisely rules the
fate of man,--when translated back into reality amounts simply to this,
namely, the will to stifle the truth which maintains the reverse of
all this, which is that hitherto man has been in the _worst possible_
hands, and that he has been governed by the physiologically botched,
the men of cunning and burning revengefulness, and the so-called
"saints"--those slanderers of the world and traducers of humanity.
The definite proof of the fact that the priest (including the priest
in disguise, the philosopher) has become master, not only within a
certain limited religious community, but everywhere, and that the
morality of decadence, the will to nonentity, has become morality
_per se,_ is to be found in this: that altruism is now an absolute
value, and egoism is regarded with hostility everywhere. He who
disagrees with me on this point, I regard as infected. But all the
world disagrees with me. To a physiologist a like antagonism between
values admits of no doubt. If the most insignificant organ within the
body neglects, however slightly, to assert with absolute certainty its
self-preservative powers, its recuperative claims, and its egoism, the
whole system degenerates. The physiologist insists upon the removal of
degenerated parts, he denies all fellow-feeling for such parts, and
has not the smallest feeling of pity for them. But the desire of the
priest is precisely the degeneration of the whole of mankind; hence his
preservation of that which is degenerate--this is what his dominion
costs humanity. What meaning have those lying concepts, those handmaids
of morality, "Soul," "Spirit," "Free will," "God," if their aim is not
the physiological ruin of mankind? When earnestness is diverted from
the instincts that aim at self-preservation and an increase of bodily
energy, _i.e._ at an _increase of life_; when anæmia is raised to an
ideal and the contempt of the body is construed as "the salvation of
the soul," what is all this if it is not a recipe for decadence? Loss
of ballast, resistance offered to natural instincts, selflessness,
in fact--this is what has hitherto been known as morality. With _The
Dawn of Day_ I first engaged in a struggle against the morality of
self-renunciation.




"JOYFUL WISDOM: LA GAYA SCIENZA"



1


_Dawn of Day_ is a yea-saying book, profound, but clear and kindly. The
same applies once more and in the highest degree to _La Gaya Scienza:_
in almost every sentence of this book, profundity and playfulness go
gently hand in hand. A verse which expresses my gratitude for the most
wonderful month of January which I have ever lived--the whole book is a
gift--sufficiently reveals the abysmal depths from which "wisdom" has
here become joyful.

    "Thou who with cleaving fiery lances
    The stream of my soul from its ice dost free,
    Till with a rush and a roar it advances
    To enter with glorious hoping the sea:
    Brighter to see and purer ever,
    Free in the bonds of thy sweet constraint,--
    So it praises thy wondrous endeavour,
    January, thou beauteous saint!"[1]

Who can be in any doubt as to what "glorious hoping" means here, when
he has realised the diamond beauty of the first of Zarathustra's
words as they appear in a glow of light at the close of the fourth
book? Or when he reads the granite sentences at the end of the third
book, wherein a fate for all times is first given a formula? The songs
of Prince Free-as-a-Bird, which, for the most part, were written in
Sicily, remind me quite forcibly of that Provencal notion of "_Gaya
Scienza,_" of that union of _singer, knight, and free spirit,_ which
distinguishes that wonderfully early culture of the Provencals from
all ambiguous cultures. The last poem of all, "To the Mistral,"--an
exuberant dance song in which, if you please, the new spirit dances
freely upon the corpse of morality,--is a perfect Provençalism.


[Footnote 1: Translated for _Joyful Wisdom_ by Paul V. Cohn.--TR.]




"THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA: A BOOK FOR ALL AND NONE"



1


I now wish to relate the history of _Zarathustra._ The fundamental
idea of the work, the _Eternal Recurrence,_ the highest formula of
a Yea-saying to life that can ever be attained, was first conceived
in the month of August 1881. I made a note of the idea on a sheet of
paper, with the postscript: "Six thousand feet beyond man and time."
That day I happened to be wandering through the woods alongside of the
Lake of Silvaplana, and I halted not far from Surlei, beside a huge
rock that towered aloft like a pyramid. It was then that the thought
struck me. Looking back now, I find that exactly two months before
this inspiration I had an omen of its coming in the form of a sudden
and decisive change in my tastes--more particularly in music. The
whole of _Zarathustra_ might perhaps be classified under the rubric
music. At all events, the essential condition of its production was
a second birth within me of the art of hearing. In Recoaro, a small
mountain resort near Vicenza, where I spent the spring of 1881, I and
my friend and maestro, Peter Gast--who was also one who had been born
again, discovered that the phœnix music hovered over us, in lighter
and brighter plumage than it had ever worn before. If, therefore, I
now calculate from that day forward the sudden production of the book,
under the most unlikely circumstances, in February 1883,--the last
part, out of which I quoted a few lines in my preface, was written
precisely in the hallowed hour when Richard Wagner gave up the ghost
in Venice,--I come to the conclusion that the period of gestation
covered eighteen months. This period of exactly eighteen months,
might suggest, at least to Buddhists, that I am in reality a female
elephant The interval was devoted to the _Gaya Scienza,_ which contains
hundreds of indications of the proximity of something unparalleled;
for, after all, it shows the beginning of _Zarathustra,_ since it
presents _Zarathustra's_ fundamental thought in the last aphorism
but one of the fourth book. To this interval also belongs that _Hymn
to Life_ (for a mixed choir and orchestra), the score of which was
published in Leipzig two years ago by E. W. Fritsch, and which gave
perhaps no slight indication of my spiritual state during this year,
in which the essentially yea-saying pathos, which I call the tragic
pathos, completely filled me heart and limb. One day people will sing
it to my memory. The text, let it be well understood, as there is
some misunderstanding abroad on this point, is not by me; it was the
astounding inspiration of a young Russian lady, Miss Lou von Salome,
with whom I was then on friendly terms. He who is in any way able
to make some sense of the last words of the poem, will divine why I
preferred and admired it: there is greatness in them. Pain is not
regarded as an objection to existence: "And if thou hast no bliss now
left to crown me--Lead on! Thou hast thy Sorrow still."

Maybe that my music is also great in this passage. (The last note of
the oboe, by the bye, is C sharp, not C. The latter is a misprint.)
During the following winter, I was living on that charmingly peaceful
Gulf of Rapallo, not far from Genoa, which cuts inland between Chiavari
and Cape Porto Fino. My health was not very good; the winter was cold
and exceptionally rainy; and the small _albergo_ in which I lived
was so close to the water that at night my sleep was disturbed if
the sea was rough. These circumstances were surely the very reverse
of favourable; and yet, in spite of it all, and as if in proof of my
belief that everything decisive comes to life in defiance of every
obstacle, it was precisely during this winter and in the midst of these
unfavourable circumstances that my _Zarathustra_ originated. In the
morning I used to start out in a southerly direction up the glorious
road to Zoagli, which rises up through a forest of pines and gives
one a view far out to sea. In the afternoon, or as often as my health
allowed, I walked round the whole bay from Santa Margherita to beyond
Porto Fino. This spot affected me all the more deeply because it was
so dearly loved by the Emperor Frederick III. In the autumn of 1886 I
chanced to be there again when he was revisiting this small forgotten
world of happiness for the last time. It was on these two roads that
all _Zarathustra_ came to me, above all, Zarathustra himself as a
type--I ought rather to say that it was on these walks that _he waylaid
me_.



2


In order to understand this type, you must first be quite clear
concerning its fundamental physiological condition: this condition
is what I call _great healthiness._ In regard to this idea I cannot
make my meaning more plain or more personal than I have done already
in one of the last aphorisms (No. 382) of the fifth book of the _Gaya
Scienza_: "We new, nameless, and unfathomable creatures," so reads
the passage, "we firstlings of a future still unproved--we who have a
new end in view also require new means to that end, that is to say,
a new healthiness, a stronger, keener, tougher, bolder, and merrier
healthiness than any that has existed heretofore. He who longs to
feel in his own soul the whole range of values and aims that have
prevailed on earth until his day, and to sail round all the coasts
of this ideal 'Mediterranean Sea'; who, from the adventures of his
own inmost experience, would fain know how it feels to be a conqueror
and discoverer of the ideal;--as also how it is with the artist, the
saint, the legislator, the sage, the scholar, the man of piety and the
godlike anchorite of yore;--such a man requires one thing above all
for his purpose, and that is, _great healthiness_--such healthiness as
he not only possesses, but also constantly acquires and must acquire,
because he is continually sacrificing it again, and is compelled to
sacrifice it! And now, therefore, after having been long on the way,
we Argonauts of the ideal, whose pluck is greater than prudence would
allow, and who are often shipwrecked and bruised, but, as I have said,
healthier than people would like to admit, dangerously healthy, and for
ever recovering our health--it would seem as if we had before us, as
a reward for all our toils, a country still undiscovered, the horizon
of which no one has yet seen, a beyond to every country and every
refuge of the ideal that man has ever known, a world so overflowing
with beauty, strangeness, doubt, terror, and divinity, that both our
curiosity and our lust of possession are frantic with eagerness. Alas!
how in the face of such vistas, and with such burning desire in our
conscience and consciousness, could we still be content with _the man
of the present day_? This is bad indeed; but, that we should regard
his worthiest aims and hopes with ill-concealed amusement, or perhaps
give them no thought at all, is inevitable. Another ideal now leads
us on, a wonderful, seductive ideal, full of danger, the pursuit of
which we should be loath to urge upon any one, because we are not so
ready to acknowledge any one's _right to it:_ the ideal of a spirit who
plays ingenuously (that is to say, involuntarily, and as the outcome
of superabundant energy and power) with everything that, hitherto,
has been called holy, good, inviolable, and divine; to whom even the
loftiest thing that the people have with reason made their measure of
value would be no better than a danger, a decay, and an abasement, or
at least a relaxation and temporary forgetfulness of self: the ideal
of a humanly superhuman well-being and goodwill, which often enough
will seem inhuman--as when, for instance, it stands beside all past
earnestness on earth, and all past solemnities in hearing, speech,
tone, look, morality, and duty, as their most lifelike and unconscious
parody--but with which, nevertheless, _great earnestness_ perhaps alone
begins, the first note of interrogation is affixed, the fate of the
soul changes, the hour hand moves, and tragedy begins."



3


Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion
of what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration?
If not, I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of
superstition left in one, it would hardly be possible completely to
set aside the idea that one is the mere incarnation, mouthpiece, or
medium of an almighty power. The idea of revelation, in the sense
that something which profoundly convulses and upsets one becomes
suddenly visible and audible with indescribable certainty and
accuracy--describes the simple fact. One hears--one does not seek; one
takes--one does not ask who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up like
lightning, it comes with necessity, without faltering--I have never had
any choice in the matter. There is an ecstasy so great that the immense
strain of it is sometimes relaxed by a flood of tears, during which
one's steps now involuntarily rush and anon involuntarily lag. There
is the feeling that one is utterly out of hand, with the very distinct
consciousness of an endless number of fine thrills and titillations
descending to one's very toes;--there is a depth of happiness in which
the most painful and gloomy parts do not act as antitheses to the rest,
but are produced and required as necessary shades of colour in such an
overflow of light. There is an instinct for rhythmic relations which
embraces a whole world of forms (length, the need of a wide-embracing
rhythm, is almost the measure of the force of an inspiration, a sort
of counterpart to its pressure and tension). Everything happens
quite involuntarily, as if in a tempestuous outburst of freedom,
of absoluteness, of power and divinity. The involuntary nature of
the figures and similes is the most remarkable thing; one loses all
perception of what is imagery and metaphor; everything seems to present
itself as the readiest, the truest, and simplest means of expression.
It actually seems, to use one of Zarathustra's own phrases, as if all
things came to one, and offered themselves as similes. ("Here do all
things come caressingly to thy discourse and flatter thee, for they
would fain ride upon thy back. On every simile thou ridest here unto
every truth. Here fly open unto thee all the speech and word shrines
of the world, here would all existence become speech, here would
all Becoming learn of thee how to speak.") This is my experience of
inspiration. I do not doubt but that I should have to go back thousands
of years before I could find another who could say to me: "It is mine
also!"



4


For a few weeks afterwards I lay an invalid in Genoa. Then followed
a melancholy spring in Rome, where I only just managed to live--and
this was no easy matter. This city, which is absolutely unsuited to
the poet-author of _Zarathustra,_ and for the choice of which I was
not responsible, made me inordinately miserable. I tried to leave it.
I wanted to go to Aquila--the opposite of Rome in every respect, and
actually founded in a spirit of hostility towards that city, just as
I also shall found a city some day, as a memento of an atheist and
genuine enemy of the Church, a person very closely related to me, the
great Hohenstaufen, the Emperor Frederick II. But Fate lay behind it
all: I had to return again to Rome. In the end I was obliged to be
satisfied with the Piazza Barberini, after I had exerted myself in
vain to find an anti-Christian quarter. I fear that on one occasion,
to avoid bad smells as much as possible, I actually inquired at the
Palazzo del Quirinale whether they could not provide a quiet room for
a philosopher. In a chamber high above the Piazza just mentioned, from
which one obtained a general view of Rome, and could hear the fountains
plashing far below, the loneliest of all songs was composed--"The
Night-Song." About this time I was obsessed by an unspeakably sad
melody, the refrain of which I recognised in the affords, "dead through
immortality," ... In the summer, finding myself once more in the sacred
place where the first thought of _Zarathustra_ flashed like a light
across my mind, I conceived the second part. Ten days sufficed. Neither
for the second, the first, nor the third part, have I required a day
longer. In the ensuing winter, beneath the halcyon sky of Nice, which
then for the first time poured its light into my life, I found the
third _Zarathustra_--and came to the end of my task: the whole having
occupied me scarcely a year. Many hidden corners and heights in the
country round about Nice are hallowed for me by moments that I can
never forget. That decisive chapter, entitled "Old and New Tables,"
was composed during the arduous ascent from the station to Eza--that
wonderful Moorish village in the rocks. During those moments when my
creative energy flowed most plentifully, my muscular activity was
always greatest. The body is inspired: let us waive the question of
"soul." I might often have been seen dancing in those days, and I could
then walk for seven or eight hours on end over the hills without a
suggestion of fatigue. I slept well and laughed a good deal--I was
perfectly robust and patient.



5


With the exception of these periods of industry lasting ten days, the
years I spent during the production of _Zarathustra,_ and thereafter,
were for me years of unparalleled distress. A man pays dearly for
being immortal: to this end he must die many times over during his
life. There is such a thing as what I call the rancour of greatness:
everything great, whether a work or a deed, once it is completed, turns
immediately against its author. The very fact that he is its author
makes him weak at this time. He can no longer endure his deed. He can
no longer look it full in the face. To have something at one's back
which one could never have willed, something to which the knot of human
destiny is attached--and to be forced thenceforward to bear it on one's
shoulders! Why, it almost crushes one! The rancour of greatness! A
somewhat different experience is the uncanny silence that reigns about
one. Solitude has seven skins which nothing can penetrate. One goes
among men; one greets friends: but these things are only new deserts,
the looks of those one meets no longer bear a greeting. At the best
one encounters a sort of revolt. This feeling of revolt, I suffered,
in varying degrees of intensity, at the hands of almost every one who
came near me; it would seem that nothing inflicts a deeper wound than
suddenly to make one's distance felt. Those noble natures are scarce
who know not how to live unless they can revere. A third thing is
the absurd susceptibility of the skin to small pin-pricks, a kind of
helplessness in the presence of all small things. This seems to me a
necessary outcome of the appalling expenditure of all defensive forces,
which is the first condition of every _creative_ act, of every act
which proceeds from the most intimate, most secret, and most concealed
recesses of a man's being. The small defensive forces are thus, as it
were, suspended, and no fresh energy reaches them. I even think it
probable that one does not digest so well, that one is less willing
to move, and that one is much too open to sensations of coldness and
suspicion; for, in a large number of cases, suspicion is merely a
blunder in etiology. On one occasion when I felt like this I became
conscious of the proximity of a herd of cows, some time before I could
possibly have seen it with my eyes, simply owing to a return in me of
milder and more humane sentiments: _they_ communicated warmth to me....



6


This work stands alone. Do not let us mention the poets in the
same breath; nothing perhaps has ever been produced out of such a
superabundance of strength. My concept "Dionysian" here became the
_highest_ deed; compared with it everything that other men have done
seems poor and limited. The fact that a Goethe or a Shakespeare would
not for an instant have known how to take breath in this atmosphere of
passion and of the heights; the fact that by the side of Zarathustra,
Dante is no more than a believer, and not one who first _creates_ the
truth--that is to say, not a world-ruling spirit, a _Fate_; the fact
that the poets of the Veda were priests and not even fit to unfasten
Zarathustra's sandal--all this is the least of things, and gives no
idea of the distance, of the azure solitude, in which this work dwells.
Zarathustra has an eternal right to say: "I draw around me circles and
holy boundaries. Ever fewer are they that mount with me to ever loftier
heights. I build me a mountain range of ever holier mountains." If all
the spirit and goodness of every great soul were collected together,
the whole could not create a single one of Zarathustra's discourses.
The ladder upon which he rises and descends is of boundless length;
he has seen further, he has willed further, and _gone_ further than
any other man. There is contradiction in every word that he utters,
this most yea-saying of all spirits. Through him all contradictions
are bound up into a new unity. The loftiest and the basest powers of
human nature, the sweetest, the lightest, and the most terrible, rush
forth from out one spring with everlasting certainty. Until his coming
no one knew what was height, or depth, and still less what was truth.
There is not a single passage in this revelation of truth which had
already been anticipated and divined by even the greatest among men.
Before Zarathustra there was no wisdom, no probing of the soul, no art
of speech: in his book, the most familiar and most vulgar thing utters
unheard-of words. The sentence quivers with passion. Eloquence has
become music. Forks of lightning are hurled towards futures of which
no one has ever dreamed before. The most powerful use of parables that
has yet existed is poor beside it, and mere child's-play compared with
this return of language to the nature of imagery. See how Zarathustra
goes down from the mountain and speaks the kindest words to every
one! See with what delicate fingers he touches his very adversaries,
the priests, and how he suffers with them from themselves! Here, at
every moment, man is overcome, and the concept "Superman" becomes the
greatest reality,--out of sight, almost far away beneath him, lies
all that which heretofore has been called great in man. The halcyonic
brightness, the light feet, the presence of wickedness and exuberance
throughout, and all that is the essence of the type Zarathustra, was
never dreamt of before as a prerequisite of greatness. In precisely
these limits of space and in this accessibility to opposites
Zarathustra feels himself the _highest of all living things_: and when
you hear how he defines this highest, you will give up trying to find
his equal.

"The soul which hath the longest ladder and can step down deepest,

"The vastest soul that can run and stray and rove furthest in its own
domain,

"The most necessary soul, that out of desire flingeth itself to chance,

"The stable soul that plungeth into Becoming, the possessing soul that
must needs taste of willing and longing,

"The soul that flyeth from itself, and over-taketh itself in the widest
circle,

"The wisest soul that folly exhorteth most sweetly,

"The most self-loving soul, in whom all things have their rise, their
ebb and flow."

But this is the very idea of Dionysus. Another consideration leads
to this idea. The psychological problem presented by the type of
Zarathustra is, how can he, who in an unprecedented manner says
no, and _acts_ no, in regard to all that which has been affirmed
hitherto, remain nevertheless a yea-saying spirit? how can he who
bears the heaviest destiny on his shoulders and whose very life-task
is a fatality, yet be the brightest and the most transcendental
of spirits--for Zarathustra is a dancer? how can he who has the
hardest and most terrible grasp of reality, and who has thought the
most "abysmal thoughts," nevertheless avoid conceiving these things
as objections to existence, or even as objections to the eternal
recurrence of existence?--how is it that on the contrary he finds
reasons for _being himself_ the eternal affirmation of all things, "the
tremendous and unlimited saying of Yea and Amen"?... "Into every abyss
do I bear the benediction of my yea to Life." ... But this, once more,
is precisely the idea of Dionysus.



7


What language will such a spirit speak, when he speaks unto his soul?
The language of the _dithyramb._ I am the inventor of the dithyramb.
Hearken unto the manner in which Zarathustra speaks to his soul _Before
Sunrise_ (iii. 48). Before my time such emerald joys and divine
tenderness had found no tongue. Even the profoundest melancholy of
such a Dionysus takes shape as a dithyramb. As an example of this I
take "The Night-Song,"--the immortal plaint of one who, thanks to his
superabundance of light and power, thanks to the sun within him, is
condemned never to love.

"It is night: now do all gushing springs raise their voices. And my
soul too is a gushing spring.

"It is night: now only do all lovers burst into song. And my soul too
is the song of a lover.

"Something unquenched and unquenchable is within me, that would raise
its voice. A craving for love is within me, which itself speaketh the
language of love.

"Light am I: would that I were night! But this is my loneliness, that I
am begirt with light.

"Alas, why am I not dark and like unto the night! How joyfully would I
then suck at the breasts of light!

"And even you would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms on
high! and be blessed in the gifts of your light.

"But in mine own light do I live, ever back into myself do I drink the
flames I send forth.

"I know not the happiness of the hand stretched forth to grasp; and oft
have I dreamt that stealing must be more blessed than taking.

"Wretched am I that my hand may never rest from giving: an envious fate
is mine that I see expectant eyes and nights made bright with longing.

"Oh, the wretchedness of all them that give! Oh, the clouds that cover
the face of my sun! That craving for desire! that burning hunger at the
end of the feast!

"They take what I give them; but do I touch their soul? A gulf is there
'twixt giving and taking; and the smallest gulf is the last to be
bridged.

"An appetite is born from out my beauty: would that I might do harm to
them that I fill with light; would that I might rob them of the gifts I
have given:--thus do I thirst for wickedness.

"To withdraw my hand when their hand is ready stretched forth like the
waterfall that wavers, wavers even in its fall:--thus do I thirst for
wickedness.

"For such vengeance doth my fulness yearn: to such tricks doth my
loneliness give birth.

"My joy in giving died with the deed. By its very fulness did my virtue
grow weary of itself.

"He who giveth risketh to lose his shame; he that is ever distributing
groweth callous in hand and heart therefrom.

"Mine eyes no longer melt into tears at the sight of the suppliant's
shame; my hand hath become too hard to feel the quivering of laden
hands.

"Whither have ye fled, the tears of mine eyes and the bloom of my
heart? Oh, the solitude of all givers! Oh, the silence of all beacons!

"Many are the suns that circle in barren space; to all that is dark do
they speak with their light--to me alone are they silent.

"Alas, this is the hatred of light for that which shineth: pitiless it
runneth its course.

"Unfair in its inmost heart to that which shineth; cold toward
suns,--thus doth every sun go its way.

"Like a tempest do the suns fly over their course: for such is their
way. Their own unswerving will do they follow: that is their coldness.

"Alas, it is ye alone, ye creatures of gloom, ye spirits of the night,
that take your warmth from that which shineth. Ye alone suck your milk
and comfort from the udders of light.

"Alas, about me there is ice, my hand burneth itself against ice!

"Alas, within me is a thirst that thirsteth for your thirst!

"It is night: woe is me, that I must needs be light! And thirst after
darkness! And loneliness!

"It is night: now doth my longing burst forth like a spring,--for
speech do I long.

"It is night: now do all gushing springs raise their voices. And my
soul too is a gushing spring.

"It is night: now only do all lovers burst into song. And my soul too
is the song of a lover."



8


Such things have never been written, never been felt, never been
_suffered:_ only a God, only Dionysus suffers in this way. The reply
to such a dithyramb on the sun's solitude in light would be Ariadne.
... Who knows, but I, who Ariadne is! To all such riddles no one
heretofore had ever found an answer; I doubt even whether any one had
ever seen a riddle here. One day Zarathustra severely determines his
life-task--and it is also mine. Let no one misunderstand its meaning.
It's a yea-saying to the point of justifying, to the point of redeeming
even all that is past.

"I walk among men as among fragments of the future: of that future
which I see.

"And all my creativeness and effort is but this, that I may be able to
think and recast all these fragments and riddles and dismal accidents
into one piece.

"And how could I bear to be a man, if man were not also a poet, a
riddle reader, and a redeemer of chance!

"To redeem all the past, and to transform every 'it was' into 'thus
would I have it'--that alone would be my salvation!"

In another passage he defines as strictly as possible what to him alone
"man" can be,--not a subject for love nor yet for pity--Zarathustra
became master even of his loathing of man: man is to him a thing
unshaped, raw material, an ugly stone that needs the sculptor's chisel.

"No longer to will, no longer to value, no longer to create! Oh, that
this great weariness may never be mine!

"Even in the lust of knowledge, I feel only the joy of my will to beget
and to grow; and if there be innocence in my knowledge, it is because
my procreative will is in it.

"Away from God and gods did this will lure me: what would there be to
create if there were gods?

"But to man doth it ever drive me anew, my burning, creative will.
Thus driveth it the hammer to the stone.

"Alas, ye men, within the stone there sleepeth an image for me, the
image of all my dreams! Alas, that it should have to sleep in the
hardest and ugliest stone!

"_Now rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prison._ From the stone
the fragments fly: what's that to me?

"I will finish it: for a shadow came unto me--the stillest and lightest
thing on earth once came unto me!

"The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Alas, my
brethren! What are the--gods to me now?"

Let me call attention to one last point of view. The line in italics is
my pretext for this remark. A Dionysian life-task needs the hardness of
the hammer, and one of its first essentials is without doubt the _joy
even of destruction._ The command, "Harden yourselves!" and the deep
conviction that _all creators are hard,_ is the really distinctive sign
of a Dionysian nature.




BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL:


"THE PRELUDE TO A PHILOSOPHY OF THE FUTURE"



1


My work for the years that followed was prescribed as distinctly
as possible. Now that the yea-saying part of my life-task was
accomplished, there came the turn of the negative portion, both in
word and deed: the transvaluation of all values that had existed
hitherto, the great war,--the conjuring-up of the day when the fatal
outcome of the struggle would be decided. Meanwhile, I had slowly to
look about me for my peers, for those who, _out of strength,_ would
proffer me a helping hand in my work of destruction. From that time
onward, all my writings are so much bait: maybe I understand as much
about fishing as most people? If nothing was _caught,_ it was not I who
was at fault _There were no fish to come and bite._



2


In all its essential points, this book (1886) is a criticism of
_modernity,_ embracing the modern sciences, arts, even politics,
together with certain indications as to a type which would be the
reverse of modern man, or as little like him as possible, a noble
and yea-saying type. In this last respect the book is a _school
for gentlemen_--the term _gentleman_ being understood here in a
much more spiritual and radical sense than it has implied hitherto.
All those things of which the age is proud,--as, for instance,
far-famed "objectivity," "sympathy with all that suffers," "the
historical sense," with its subjection to foreign tastes, with its
lying-in-the-dust before _petits faits,_ and the rage for science,--are
shown to be the contradiction of the type recommended, and are
regarded as almost ill-bred. If you remember that this book follows
upon _Zarathustra,_ you may possibly guess to what system of diet it
owes its life. The eye which, owing to tremendous constraint, has
become accustomed to see at a great distance,--_Zarathustra_ is even
more far-sighted than the Tsar,--is here forced to focus sharply that
which is close at hand, the present time, the things that lie about
him. In all the aphorisms and more particularly in the form of this
book, the reader will find the same _voluntary_ turning away from those
instincts which made a _Zarathustra_ a possible feat. Refinement in
form, in aspiration, and in the art of keeping silent, are its more or
less obvious qualities; psychology is handled with deliberate hardness
and cruelty,--the whole book does not contain one single good-natured
word.... All this sort of thing refreshes a man. Who can guess the kind
of recreation that is necessary after such an expenditure of goodness
as is to be found in _Zarathustra_? From a theological standpoint--now
pay ye heed; for it is but on rare occasions that I speak as a
theologian--it was God Himself who, at the end of His great work,
coiled Himself up in the form of a serpent at the foot of the tree of
knowledge. It was thus that He recovered from being a God.... He had
made everything too beautiful.... The devil is simply God's moment of
idleness, on that seventh day.




"THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS: A POLEMIC"


The three essays which constitute this genealogy are, as regards
expression, aspiration, and the art of the unexpected, perhaps the
most curious things that have ever been written. Dionysus, as you know,
is also the god of darkness. In each case the beginning is calculated
to mystify; it is cool, scientific, even ironical, intentionally
thrust to the fore, intentionally reticent. Gradually less calmness
prevails; here and there a flash of lightning defines the horizon;
exceedingly unpleasant truths break upon your ears from out remote
distances with a dull, rumbling sound,--until very soon a fierce tempo
is attained in which everything presses forward at a terrible degree
of tension. At the end, in each case, amid fearful thunderclaps, a new
truth shines out between thick clouds. The truth of the first essays
the psychology of Christianity: the birth of Christianity out of the
spirit of resentment, not, as is supposed, out of the "Spirit,"--in
all its essentials, a counter-movement, the great insurrection against
the dominion of noble values. The second essay contains the psychology
of conscience: this is not, as you may believe, "the voice of God in
man"; it is the instinct of cruelty, which turns inwards once it is
unable to discharge itself outwardly. Cruelty is here exposed, for the
first time, as one of the oldest and most indispensable elements in the
foundation of culture. The third essay replies to the question as to
the origin of the formidable power of the ascetic ideal, of the priest
ideal, despite the fact that this ideal is essentially detrimental,
that it is a will to nonentity and to decadence. Reply: it flourished
not because God was active behind the priests, as is generally
believed, but because it was a _faute de mieux_--from the fact that
hitherto it has been the only ideal and has had no competitors. "For
man prefers to aspire to nonentity than not to aspire at all." But
above all, until the time of _Zarathustra_ there was no such thing
as a counter-ideal. You have understood my meaning. Three decisive
overtures on the part of a psychologist to a _Transvaluation of all
Values._--This book contains the first psychology of the priest.




"THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS:

HOW TO PHILOSOPHISE WITH THE HAMMER"



1


This work--which covers scarcely one hundred and fifty pages, with its
cheerful and fateful tone, like a laughing demon, and the production
of which occupied so few days that I hesitate to give their number--is
altogether an exception among books: there is no work more rich in
substance, more independent, more upsetting--more wicked. If any one
should desire to obtain a rapid sketch of how everything, before my
time, was standing on its head, he should begin reading me in this
book. That which is called "Idols" on the title page is simply the
old truth that has been believed in hitherto. In plain English, _The
Twilight of the Idols_ means that the old truth is on its last legs.



2


There is no reality, no "ideality," which has not been touched in
this book (touched! what a cautious euphemism!). Not only the eternal
idols, but also the youngest--that is to say, the most senile: modern
ideas, for instance. A strong wind blows between the trees and in
all directions fall the fruit--the truths. There is the waste of an
all-too-rich autumn in this book: you trip over truths. You even crush
some to death, there are too many of them. Those things that you can
grasp, however, are quite unquestionable; they are irrevocable decrees.
I alone have the criterion of "truths" in my possession. I alone _can_
decide. It would seem as if a second consciousness had grown up in me,
as if the "life-will" in me had thrown a light upon the downward path
along which it has been running throughout the ages. The _downward
path_--hitherto this had been called the road to "Truth." All obscure
impulse--"darkness and dismay"--is at an end, the "_good man_" was
precisely he who was least aware of the proper way.[1] And, speaking
in all earnestness, no one before me knew the proper way, the way
upwards: only after my time could men once more find hope, life-tasks,
and roads mapped out that lead to culture--_I am the joyful harbinger
of this culture._ ... On this account alone I am also a fatality.



3


Immediately after the completion of the above-named work, and without
letting even one day go by, I tackled the formidable task of the
_Transvaluation_ with a supreme feeling of pride which nothing could
equal; and, certain at each moment of my immortality, I cut sign after
sign upon tablets of brass with the sureness of Fate. The Preface
came into being on 3rd September 1888. When, after having written it
down, I went out into the open that morning, I was greeted by the most
beautiful day I had ever seen in the Upper Engadine--clear, glowing
with colour, and presenting all the contrasts and all the intermediary
gradations between ice and the south. I left Sils-Maria only on the
20th of September. I had been forced to delay my departure owing to
floods, and I was very soon, and for some days, the only visitor in
this wonderful spot, on which my gratitude bestows the gift of an
immortal name. After a journey that was full of incidents, and not
without danger to life,--as for instance at Como, which was flooded
when I reached it in the dead of night,--I got to Turin on the
afternoon of the 21 st. Turin is the only suitable place for me, and
it shall be my home henceforward. I took the same lodgings as I had
occupied in the spring, 6111 Via Carlo Alberto, opposite the mighty
Palazzo Carignano, in which Vittorio Emanuele was born; and I had a
view of the Piazza Carlo Alberto and above it across to the hills.
Without hesitating, or allowing myself to be disturbed for a single
moment, I returned to my work, only the last quarter of which had still
to be written. On the 30th September, tremendous triumph; the seventh
day; the leisure of a god on the banks of the Po.[2] On the same day,
I wrote the Preface to _The Twilight of the Idols,_ the correction of
the proofs of which provided me with recreation during the month of
September. Never in my life have I experienced such an autumn; nor
had I ever imagined that such things were possible on earth--a Claude
Lorrain extended to infinity, each day equal to the last in its wild
perfection.


[Footnote 1: A witty reference to Goethe's well-known passage in the
Prologue to _Faust_:--

"A good man, though in darkness and dismay,
May still be conscious of the proper way."

The words are spoken by the Lord.--TR. ]

[Footnote 2: There is a wonderful promenade along the banks of the Po,
for which Turin is famous, and of which Nietzsche was particularly
fond.--TR.]




"THE CASE OF WAGNER: A MUSICIAN'S PROBLEM"



1


In order to do justice to this essay a man ought to suffer from the
fate of music as from an open wound.--From what do I suffer when I
suffer from the fate of music? From the fact that music has lost
its world-transfiguring, yea-saying character--that it is decadent
music and no longer the flute of Dionysus. Supposing, however, that
the fate of music be as dear to man as his own life, because joy and
suffering are alike bound up with it; then he will find this pamphlet
comparatively mild and full of consideration. To be cheerful in
such circumstances, and laugh good-naturedly with others at one's
self,--_ridendodicere severum_[1] when the _verum dicere_ would
justify every sort of hardness,--is humanity itself. Who doubts that
I, old artillery-man that I am, would be able if I liked to point my
_heavy_ guns at Wagner?--Everything decisive in this question I kept
to myself--I have loved Wagner.--After all, an attack upon a more than
usually subtle "unknown person" whom another would not have divined
so easily, lies in the meaning and path of my life-task. Oh, I have
still quite a number of other "unknown persons" to unmask besides a
Cagliostro of Music! Above all, I have to direct an attack against
the German people, who, in matters of the spirit, grow every day
more indolent, poorer in instincts, and more _honest_ who, with an
appetite for which they are to be envied, continue to diet themselves
on contradictions, and gulp down "Faith" in company with science,
Christian love together with anti-Semitism, and the will to power (to
the "Empire"), dished up with the gospel of the humble, without showing
the slightest signs of indigestion. Fancy this absence of party-feeling
in the presence of opposites! Fancy this gastric neutrality and
"disinterestedness"! Behold this sense of justice in the German palate,
which can grant equal rights to all,--which finds everything tasteful!
Without a shadow of a doubt the Germans are idealists. When I was last
in Germany, I found German taste striving to grant Wagner and the
_Trumpeter of Sakkingen_[2] equal rights; while I myself witnessed
the attempts of the people of Leipzig to do honour to one of the most
genuine and most German of musicians,--using German here in the old
sense of the word,--a man who was no mere German of the Empire, the
master Heinrich Schütz, by founding a Liszt Society, the object of
which was to cultivate and spread artful (_listige_[3]) Church music.
Without a shadow of doubt the Germans are idealists.



2


But here nothing shall stop me from being rude, and from telling the
Germans one or two unpleasant home truths: who else would do it if I
did not? I refer to their laxity in matters historical. Not only have
the Germans entirely lost the _breadth of vision_ which enables one
to grasp the course of culture and the values of culture; not only
are they one and all political (or Church) puppets; but they have
also actually _put a ban upon_ this very breadth of vision. A man
must first and foremost be "German," he must belong to "_the_ race";
then only can he pass judgment upon all values and lack of values
in history--then only can he establish them.... To be German is in
itself an argument, "Germany, Germany above all,"[4] is a principle;
the Germans stand for the "moral order of the universe" in history;
compared with the Roman Empire, they are the up-holders of freedom;
compared with the eighteenth century, they are the restorers of
morality, of the "Categorical Imperative." There is such a thing as
the writing of history according to the lights of Imperial Germany;
there is, I fear, anti-Semitic history--there is also history written
with an eye to the Court, and Herr von Treitschke is not ashamed
of himself. Quite recently an idiotic opinion _in historicis,_ an
observation of Vischer the Swabian æsthete, since happily deceased,
made the round of the German newspapers as a "truth" to which every
German _must assent_ The observation was this: "The Renaissance _and_
the Reformation only together constitute a whole--the æsthetic
rebirth, and the moral rebirth." When I listen to such things, I lose
all patience, and I feel inclined, I even feel it my duty, to tell the
Germans, for once in a way, all that they have on their conscience.
_Every great crime against culture for the last four centuries lies
on their conscience...._ And always for the same reason, always owing
to their bottomless cowardice in the face of reality, which is also
cowardice in the face of truth; always owing to the love of falsehood
which has become almost instinctive in them--in short, "idealism."
It was the Germans who caused Europe to lose the fruits, the whole
meaning of her last period of greatness--the period of the Renaissance.
At a moment when a higher order of values, values that were noble,
that said yea to life, and that guaranteed a future, had succeeded
in triumphing over the opposite values, the values of degeneration,
in the very seat of Christianity itself,--and _even in the hearts of
those sitting there,_--Luther, that cursed monk, not only restored the
Church, but, what was a thousand times worse, restored Christianity,
and at a time too when it lay defeated. Christianity, the _Denial of
the Will to Live,_ exalted to a religion! Luther was an impossible
monk who, thanks to his own "impossibility," attacked the Church,
and in so doing restored it! Catholics would be perfectly justified
in celebrating feasts in honour of Luther, and in producing festival
plays[5] in his honour. Luther and the "rebirth of morality"! May all
psychology go to the devil! Without a shadow of a doubt the Germans
are idealists. On two occasions when, at the cost of enormous courage
and self-control, an upright, unequivocal, and perfectly scientific
attitude of mind had been attained, the Germans were able to discover
back stairs leading down to the old "ideal" again, compromises between
truth and the "ideal," and, in short, formulæ for the right to reject
science and to perpetrate falsehoods. Leibniz and Kant--these two
great breaks upon the intellectual honesty of Europe! Finally, at a
moment when there appeared on the bridge that spanned two centuries
of decadence, a superior force of genius and will which was strong
enough to consolidate Europe and to convert it into a political and
economic unit, with the object of ruling the world, the Germans, with
their Wars of Independence, robbed Europe of the significance--the
marvellous significance, of Napoleon's life. And in so doing they laid
on their conscience everything that followed, everything that exists
to-day,--this sickliness and want of reason which is most opposed to
culture, and which is called Nationalism,--this _névrose nationale_
from which Europe is suffering acutely; this eternal subdivision of
Europe into petty states, with politics on a municipal scale: they have
robbed Europe itself of its significance, of its reason,--and have
stuffed it into a cul-de-sac. Is there any one except me who knows the
way out of this cul-de-sac? Does anyone except me know of an aspiration
which would be great enough to bind the people of Europe once more
together?



3


And after all, why should I not express my suspicions? In my case,
too, the Germans will attempt to make a great fate give birth merely
to a mouse. Up to the present they have compromised themselves with
me; I doubt whether the future will improve them. Alas! how happy I
should be to prove a false prophet in this matter! My natural readers
and listeners are already Russians, Scandinavians, and Frenchmen--will
they always be the same? In the history of knowledge, Germans are
represented only by doubtful names, they have been able to produce only
"_unconscious_" swindlers (this word applies to Fichte, Schelling,
Schopenhauer, Hegel, and Schleiermacher, just as well as to Kant or
Leibniz; they were all mere _Schleiermachers_).[6] The Germans must
not have the honour of seeing the first upright intellect in their
history of intellects, that intellect in which truth ultimately got the
better of the fraud of four thousand years, reckoned as one with the
German intellect. "German intellect" is my foul air: I breathe with
difficulty in the neighbourhood of this psychological uncleanliness
that has now become instinctive--an uncleanliness which in every
word and expression betrays a German. They have never undergone a
seventeenth century of hard self-examination, as the French have,--a
La Rochefoucauld, a Descartes, are a thousand times more upright
than the very first among Germans,--the latter have not yet had any
psychologists. But psychology is almost the standard of measurement
for the cleanliness or uncleanliness of a race.... For if a man is
not even clean, how can he be deep? The Germans are like women, you
can scarcely ever I fathom their depths--they haven't any, and that's
the end of it. Thus they cannot even be called shallow. That which is
called "deep" in Germany, is precisely this instinctive uncleanliness
towards one's self, of which I have just spoken: people refuse to be
clear in regard to their own natures. Might I be allowed, perhaps, to
suggest the word "German" as an international epithet denoting this
psychological depravity?--At the moment of writing, for instance, the
German Emperor is declaring it to be his Christian duty to liberate
the slaves in Africa; among us Europeans, then, this would be called
simply "German." ... Have the Germans ever produced even a book that
had depth? They are lacking in the mere idea of what constitutes a
book. I have known scholars who thought that Kant was deep. At the
Court of Prussia I fear that Herr von Treitschke is regarded as deep.
And when I happen to praise Stendhal as a deep psychologist, I have
often been compelled, in the company of German University Professors,
to spell his name aloud.



4


And why should I not proceed to the end? I am fond of clearing the
air. It is even part of my ambition to be considered as essentially a
despiser of Germans. I expressed my suspicions of the German character
even at the age of six-and-twenty (see _Thoughts out of Season,_
vol. ii. pp. 164, 165),--to my mind the Germans are impossible.
When I try to think of the kind of man who is opposed to me in all
my instincts, my mental image takes the form of a German. The first
thing I ask myself when I begin analysing a man, is, whether he has a
feeling for distance in him; whether he sees rank, gradation, and order
everywhere between man and man; whether he makes distinctions; for
this is what constitutes a gentleman. Otherwise he belongs hopelessly
to that open-hearted, open-minded--alas! and always very good-natured
species, _la canaille_! But the Germans are _canaille_--alas! they are
so good-natured! A man lowers himself by frequenting the society of
Germans: the German places every one on an equal footing. With the
exception of my intercourse with one or two artists, and above all
with Richard Wagner, I cannot say that I have spent one pleasant hour
with Germans. Suppose, for one moment, that the profoundest spirit
of all ages were to appear among Germans, then one of the saviours
of the Capitol would be sure to arise and declare that his own ugly
soul was just as great. I can no longer abide this race with which
a man is always in bad company, which; has no idea of nuances--woe
to me! I am a nuance--and which has not _esprit_ in its feet, and
cannot even walk withal! In short, the Germans have no feet at all,
they simply have legs. The Germans have not the faintest idea of how
vulgar they are--but this in itself is the acme of vulgarity,--they are
not even ashamed of being merely Germans. They will have their say in
everything, they regard themselves as fit to decide all questions; I
even fear that they have decided about me. My whole life is essentially
a proof of this remark. In vain have I sought among them for a sign of
tact and delicacy towards myself. Among Jews I did indeed find it, but
not among Germans. I am so constituted as to be gentle and kindly to
every one,--I have the right not to draw distinctions,--but this does
not prevent my eyes from being open. I except no one, and least of all
my friends,--I only trust that this has not prejudiced my reputation
for humanity among them? There are five or six things which I have
always made points of honour. Albeit, the truth remains that for many
years I have considered almost every letter that has reached me as a
piece of cynicism. There is more cynicism in an attitude of goodwill
towards me than in any sort of hatred. I tell every friend to his face
that he has never thought it worth his while to _study_ any one of my
writings: from the slightest hints I gather that they do not even know
what lies hidden in my books. And with regard even to my _Zarathustra,_
which of my friends would have seen more in it than a piece of
unwarrantable, though fortunately harmless, arrogance? Ten years have
elapsed, and no one has yet felt it a duty to his conscience to defend
my name against the absurd silence beneath which it has been entombed.
It was a foreigner, a Dane, who first showed sufficient keenness of
instinct and of courage to do this, and who protested indignantly
against my so-called friends. At what German University to-day would
such lectures on my philosophy be possible, as those which Dr. Brandes
delivered last spring in Copenhagen, thus proving once more his right
to the title psychologist? For my part, these things have never caused
me any pain; that which is _necessary_ does not offend me. _Amor fati_
is the core of my nature. This, however, does not alter the fact that
I love irony and even world-historic irony. And thus, about two years
before hurling the destructive thunderbolt of the _Transvaluation,_
which will send the whole of civilisation into convulsions, I sent
my _Case of Wagner_ out into the world. The Germans were given the
chance of blundering and immortalising their stupidity once more on my
account, and they still have just enough time to do it in. And have
they fallen in with my plans? Admirably! my dear Germans. Allow me to
congratulate you.



[Footnote 1: The motto of _The Case of Wagner._--TR.]

[Footnote 2: An opera by Nessler which was all the rage in Germany
twenty years ago.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: Unfortunately it is impossible to render this play on the
words in English.--TR.]

[Footnote 4: The German National Song (_Deutschland, Deutschland über
alles_).--TR.]

[Footnote 5: Ever since the year 1617 such plays have been produced by
the Protestants of Germany.--TR.]

[Footnote 6: _Schleiermacher_ literally means a weaver or maker of
veils.--TR.]




WHY I AM A FATALITY



1


I know my destiny. There will come a day $ when my name will recall
the memory of something formidable--a crisis the like of which has
never been known on earth, the memory of the most profound clash
of consciences, and the passing of a sentence upon all that which
theretofore had been believed, exacted, and hallowed. I am not a
man, I am dynamite. And with it all there is nought of the founder
of a religion in me. Religions are matters for the mob; after coming
in contact with a religious man, I always feel that I must wash my
hands.... I require no "believers," it is my opinion that I am too
full of malice to believe even in myself; I never address myself to
masses. I am horribly frightened that one day I shall be pronounced
"holy." You will understand why I publish this book beforehand--it is
to prevent people from wronging me. I refuse to be a saint; I would
rather be a clown. Maybe I am a clown. And I am notwithstanding, or
rather not _not_withstanding, the mouthpiece of truth; for nothing
more blown-out with falsehood has ever existed, than a saint. But
my truth is terrible: for hitherto _lies_ have been called truth.
_The Transvaluation of all Values,_ this is my formula for mankind's
greatest step towards coming to its senses--a step which in me became
flesh and genius. My destiny ordained that I should be the first decent
human being, and that I should feel myself opposed to the falsehood
of millenniums. I was the first to discover truth, and for the simple
reason that I was the first who became conscious of falsehood as
falsehood--that is to say, I smelt it as such. My genius resides in
my nostrils. I contradict as no one has contradicted hitherto, and am
nevertheless the reverse of a negative spirit. I am the harbinger of
joy, the like of which has never existed before; I have discovered
tasks of such lofty greatness that, until my time, no one had any idea
of such things. Mankind can begin to have fresh hopes, only now that I
have lived. Thus, I am necessarily a man of Fate. For when Truth enters
the lists against the falsehood of ages, shocks are bound to ensue,
and a spell of earthquakes, followed by the transposition of hills and
valleys, such as the world has never yet imagined even in its dreams.
The concept "politics" then becomes elevated entirely to the sphere
of spiritual warfare. All the mighty realms of the ancient order of
society are blown into space--for they are all based on falsehood:
there will be wars, the like of which have never been seen on earth
before. Only from my time and after me will politics on a large scale
exist on earth.



2


If you should require a formula for a destiny of this kind that has
taken human form, you will find it in my _Zarathustra_.

"And he who would be a creator in good and evil--verily, he must first
be a destroyer, and break values into pieces.

"Thus the greatest evil belongeth unto the greatest good: but this is
the creative good."

I am by far the most terrible man that has ever existed; but this does
not alter the fact that I shall become the most beneficent. I know the
joy of _annihilation_ to a degree which is commensurate with my power
to annihilate. In both cases I obey my Dionysian nature, which knows
not how to separate the negative deed from the saying of yea. I am the
first immoralist, and in this sense I am essentially the annihilator.



3


People have never asked me as they should have done, what the name
of Zarathustra precisely meant in my mouth, in the mouth of the
first immoralist; for that which distinguishes this Persian from all
others in the past is the very fact that he was the exact reverse
of an immoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle
between good and evil the essential wheel in the working of things.
The translation of morality into the realm of metaphysics, as force,
cause, end-in-itself, is his work. But the very question suggests
its own answer. Zarathustra created this most portentous of all
errors,--morality; therefore he must be the first to expose it. Not
only because he has had longer and greater experience of the subject
than any other thinker,--all history is indeed the experimental
refutation of the theory of the so-called moral order of things,--but
because of the more important fact that Zarathustra was the most
truthful of thinkers. In his teaching alone is truthfulness upheld as
the highest virtue--that is to say, as the reverse of the cowardice
of the "idealist" who takes to his heels at the sight of reality.
Zarathustra has more pluck in his body than all other thinkers put
together. To tell the truth and to aim straight: that is the first
Persian virtue. Have I made myself clear? ... The overcoming of
morality by itself, through truthfulness, the moralist's overcoming of
himself in his opposite--in me--that is what the name Zarathustra means
in my mouth.



4


In reality two negations are involved in my title Immoralist. I first
of all deny the type of man that has hitherto been regarded as the
highest--the _good,_ the _kind,_ and the _charitable_; and I also
deny that kind of morality which has become recognised and paramount
as morality-in-itself--I speak of the morality of decadence, or, to
use a still cruder term, Christian morality. I would agree to the
second of the two negations being regarded as the more decisive, for,
reckoned as a whole, the overestimation of goodness and kindness seems
to me already a consequence of decadence, a symptom of weakness, and
incompatible with any ascending and yea-saying life. Negation and
annihilation are inseparable from a yea-saying attitude towards life.
Let me halt for a moment at the question of the psychology of the
good man. In order to appraise the value of a certain type of man, the
cost of his maintenance must be calculated,--and the conditions of his
existence must be known. The condition of the existence of the _good_
is falsehood: or, otherwise expressed, the refusal at any price to
see how reality is actually constituted. The refusal to see that this
reality is not so constituted as always to be stimulating beneficent
instincts, and still less, so as to suffer at all moments the intrusion
of ignorant and good-natured hands. To consider distress of all kinds
as an objection, as something which must be done away with, is the
greatest nonsense on earth; generally speaking, it is nonsense of the
most disastrous sort, fatal in its stupidity--almost as mad as the will
to abolish bad weather, out of pity for the poor, so to speak. In the
great economy of the whole universe, the terrors of reality (in the
passions, in the desires, in the will to power) are incalculably more
necessary than that form of petty happiness which is called "goodness";
it is even needful to practise leniency in order so much as to allow
the latter a place at all, seeing that it is based upon a falsification
of the instincts. I shall have an excellent opportunity of showing the
incalculably calamitous consequences to the whole of history, of the
credo of optimism, this monstrous offspring of the _homines optimi._
Zarathustra,[1] the first who recognised that the optimist is just as
degenerate as the pessimist, though perhaps more detrimental, says:
"_Good men never speak the truth. False shores and false harbours
were ye taught by the good. In the lies of the good were ye born and
bred. Through the good everything hath become false and crooked from
the roots._" Fortunately the world is not built merely upon those
instincts which would secure to the good-natured herd animal his paltry
happiness. To desire everybody to become a "good man," "a gregarious
animal," "a blue-eyed, benevolent, beautiful soul," or--as Herbert
Spencer wished--a creature of altruism, would mean robbing existence of
its greatest character, castrating man, and reducing humanity to a sort
of wretched Chinadom. _And this some have tried to do! It is precisely
this that men called morality._ In this sense Zarathustra calls "the
good," now "the last men," and anon "the beginning of the end"; and
above all, he considers them as _the most detrimental kind of men,_
because they secure their existence at the cost of Truth and at the
cost of the Future.

"The good--they cannot create; they are ever the beginning of the end.

"They crucify him who writeth new values on new tables; they sacrifice
_unto themselves_ the future; they crucify the whole future of humanity!

"The good--they are ever the beginning of the end.

"And whatever harm the slanderers of the world may do, _the harm of the
good is the most calamitous of all harm._"



5


Zarathustra, as the first psychologist of the good man, is perforce the
friend of the evil man. When a degenerate kind of man has succeeded
to the highest rank among the human species, his position must have
been gained at the cost of the reverse type--at the cost of the strong
man who is certain of life. When the gregarious animal stands in
the glorious rays of the purest virtue, the exceptional man must be
degraded to the rank of the evil. If falsehood insists at all costs on
claiming the word "truth" for its own particular standpoint, the really
truthful man must be sought out among the despised. Zarathustra allows
of no doubt here; he says that it was precisely the knowledge of the
good, of the "best," which inspired his absolute horror of men. And
it was out of this feeling of repulsion that he grew the wings which
allowed him to soar into remote futures. He does not conceal the fact
that his type of man is one which is relatively superhuman--especially
as opposed to the "good" man, and that the good and the just would
regard his superman as the _devil._

"Ye higher men, on whom my gaze now falls, this is the doubt that ye
wake in my breast, and this is my secret laughter: methinks ye would
call my Superman--the devil! So strange are ye in your souls to all
that is great, that the Superman would be terrible in your eyes for his
goodness."

It is from this passage, and from no other, that you must set out to
understand the goal to which Zarathustra aspires--the kind of man that
he conceives sees reality _as it is;_ he is strong enough for this--he
is not estranged or far removed from it, he is that reality himself, in
his own nature can be found all the terrible and questionable character
of reality: _only thus can man have greatness._



6


But I have chosen the title of Immoral is t as a surname and as a badge
of honour in yet another sense; I am very proud to possess this name
which distinguishes me from all the rest of mankind. No one hitherto
has felt Christian morality beneath him; to that end there were needed
height, a remoteness of vision, and an abysmal psychological depth, not
believed to be possible hitherto. Up to the present Christian morality
has been the Circe of all thinkers--they stood at her service. What
man, before my time, had descended into the underground caverns from
out of which the poisonous fumes of this ideal--of this slandering
of the world--burst forth? What man had even dared to suppose that
they were underground caverns? Was a single one of the philosophers
who preceded me a psychologist at all, and not the very reverse of a
psychologist--that is to say, a "superior swindler," an "Idealist"?
Before my time there was no psychology. To be the first in this new
realm may amount to a curse; at all events, it is a fatality: _for one
is also the first to despise._ My danger is the loathing of mankind.



7


Have you understood me? That which defines me, that which makes me
stand apart from the whole of the rest of humanity, is the fact that
I _unmasked_ Christian morality. For this reason I was in need of a
word which conveyed the idea of a challenge to everybody. Not to have
awakened to these discoveries before, struck me as being the sign
of the greatest uncleanliness that mankind has on its conscience,
as self-deception become instinctive, as the fundamental will to
be blind to every phenomenon, all causality and all reality; in
fact, as an almost criminal fraud _in psychologicis._ Blindness in
regard to Christianity is the essence of criminality--for it is the
crime _against_ life. Ages and peoples, the first as well as the
last, philosophers and old women, with the exception of five or six
moments in history (and of myself, the seventh), are all alike in
this. Hitherto the Christian has been _the_ "moral being," a peerless
oddity, and, _as_ "a moral being," he was more absurd, more vain, more
thoughtless, and a greater disadvantage to himself, than the greatest
despiser of humanity could have deemed possible. Christian morality
is the most malignant form of all false too the actual Circe of
humanity: that which has corrupted mankind. It is not error as error
which infuriates me at the sight of this spectacle; it is not the
millenniums of absence of "goodwill," of discipline, of decency, and
of bravery in spiritual things, which betrays itself in the triumph of
Christianity; it is rather the absence of nature, it is the perfectly
ghastly fact that _anti-nature_ itself received the highest honours as
morality and as law, and remained suspended over man as the Categorical
Imperative. Fancy blundering in this way, _not_ as an individual,
_not_ as a people, but as a whole species! as _humanity_! To teach the
contempt of all the principal instincts of life; to posit falsely the
existence of a "soul," of a "spirit," in order to be able to defy the
body; to spread the feeling that there is something impure in the very
first prerequisite of life--in sex; to seek the principle of evil in
the profound need of growth and expansion--that is to say, in severe
self-love (the term itself is slanderous); and conversely to see a
higher moral value--but what am I talking about?--I mean the _moral
value per se,_ in the typical signs of decline, in the antagonism of
the instincts, in "selflessness," in the loss of ballast, in "the
suppression of the personal element," and in "love of one's neighbour"
(neighbouritis!). What! is humanity itself in a state of degeneration?
Has it always been in this state? One thing is certain, that ye are
taught only the values of decadence as the highest values. The morality
of self-renunciation is essentially the morality of degeneration; the
fact, "I am going to the dogs," is translated into the imperative,"
Ye shall all go to the dogs"--and not only into the imperative. This
morality of self-renunciation, which is the only kind of morality that
has been taught hitherto, betrays the will to nonentity--it denies life
to the very roots. There still remains the possibility that it is not
mankind that is in a state of degeneration, but only that parasitical
kind of man--the priest, who, by means of morality and lies, has
climbed up to his position of determinator of values, who divined in
Christian morality his road to power. And, to tell the truth, this
is my opinion. The teachers and I leaders of mankind--including the
theologians--have been, every one of them, decadents: hence their)
transvaluation of all values into a hostility towards; life; hence
morality. _The definition of morality;_ Morality is the idiosyncrasy of
decadents, actuated by a desire _to avenge themselves with success upon
life._ I attach great value to this definition.



8


Have you understood me? I have not uttered a single word which I had
not already said five years ago through my mouthpiece Zarathustra.
The unmasking of Christian morality is an event which unequalled in
history, it is a real catastrophe. The man who throws light upon it
is a _force majeure,_ a fatality; he breaks the history of man into
two. Time is reckoned up before him and after him. The lightning
flash of truth struck precisely that which theretofore had stood
highest: he who understands what was destroyed by that flash should
look to see whether he still holds anything in his hands. Everything
which until then was called truth, has been revealed as the most
detrimental, most spiteful, and most subterranean form of life; the
holy pretext, which was the "improvement" of man, has been recognised
as a ruse for draining life of its energy and of its blood. Morality
conceived as _Vampirism_.... The man who unmasks morality has also
unmasked the worthlessness of the values in which men either believe
or have believed; he no longer sees anything to be revered in the most
venerable man--even in the types of men that have been pronounced
holy; all he can see in them is the most fatal kind of abortions,
fatal, _because they fascinate._ The concept "God" was invented as
the opposite of the concept life--everything detrimental, poisonous,
and slanderous, and all deadly hostility to life, wad bound together
in one horrible unit in Him. The concepts "beyond" and "true world"
were invented in order to depreciate the only world that exists--in
order that no goal or aim, no sense or task, might be left to earthly
reality. The concepts "soul," "spirit," and last of all the concept
"immortal soul," were invented in order to throw contempt on the body,
in order to make it sick and "holy," in order to cultivate an attitude
of appalling levity towards all things in life which deserve to be
treated seriously, _i.e._ the questions of nutrition and habitation,
of intellectual diet, the treatment of the sick, cleanliness, and
weather. Instead of health, we find the "salvation of the soul"--that
is to say, a _folie circulate_ fluctuating between convulsions and
penitence and the hysteria of redemption. The concept "sin," together
with the torture instrument appertaining to it, which is the concept
"free will," was invented in order to confuse and muddle our instincts,
and to render the mistrust of them man's second nature! In the concepts
"disinterestedness" and "self-denial," the actual signs of decadence
are to be found. The allurement of that which is detrimental, the
inability to discover one's own advantage and self-destruction, are
made into absolute qualities, into the "duty," the "holiness," and
the "divinity" of man. Finally--to keep the worst to the last--by the
notion of the _good_ man, all that is favoured which is weak, ill,
botched, and sick-in-itself, which _ought to be wiped out._ The law
of selection is thwarted, an ideal is made out of opposition to the
proud, well-constituted man, to him who says yea to life, to him who
is certain of the future, and who guarantees the future--this man is
henceforth called the _evil_ one. And all this was believed in as
_morality!--Ecrasez l'infâme!_



9


Have you understood me? _Dionysus_ versus _Christ._


[Footnote 1: Needless to say this is Nietzsche, and no longer the
Persian.--TR.]




EDITORIAL NOTE TO POETRY


The editor begs to state that, contrary to his announcement in
the Editorial Note to _The Joyful Wisdom,_ in which he declared
his intention of publishing all of Nietzsche's poetry, he has
nevertheless withheld certain less important verses from publication.
This alteration in his plans is due to his belief that it is an
injustice and an indiscretion on the part of posterity to surprise an
author, as it were, in his _négligé,_ or, in plain English, "in his
shirt-sleeves." Authors generally are very sensitive on this point, and
rightly so: a visit behind the scenes is not precisely to the advantage
of the theatre, and even finished pictures not yet framed are not
readily shown by the careful artist. As the German edition, however,
contains nearly all that Nietzsche left behind, either in small
notebooks or on scraps of paper, the editor could not well suppress
everything that was not prepared for publication by Nietzsche himself,
more particularly as some of the verses are really very remarkable.
He has, therefore, made a very plentiful selection from the _Songs
and Epigrams,_ nearly all of which are to be found translated here,
and from the Fragments of the Dionysus Dithyrambs, of which over half
have been given. All the complete Dionysus Dithyrambs appear in this
volume, save those which are duplicates of verses already translated
in the Fourth Part of _Zarathustra._ These Dionysus Dithyrambs were
prepared ready for press by Nietzsche himself. He wrote the final
manuscript during the summer of 1888 in Sils Maria; their actual
composition, however, belongs to an earlier date.

All the verses, unless otherwise stated, have been translated by Mr.
Paul Victor Cohn.




SONGS, EPIGRAMS, ETC.


SONGS



    TO MELANCHOLY[1]


    O Melancholy, be not wroth with me
      That I this pen should point to praise thee only,
    And in thy praise, with head bowed to the knee,
      Squat like a hermit on a tree-stump lonely.
    Thus oft thou saw'st me,--yesterday, at least,--
      Full in the morning sun and its hot beaming,
    While, visioning the carrion of his feast,
      The hungry vulture valleyward flew screaming.

    Yet didst thou err, foul bird, albeit I,
      So like a mummy 'gainst my log lay leaning!
    Thou couldst not see these eyes whose ecstasy
      Rolled hither, thither, proud and overweening.
    What though they did not soar unto thine height,
      or reached those far-off, cloud-reared precipices,
    For _that_ they sank the deeper so they might
      Within themselves light Destiny's abysses.

    Thus oft in sullenness perverse and free,
      Bent hideous like a savage at his altar,
    There, Melancholy, held I thought of thee,
      A penitent, though youthful, with his psalter.

    So crouched did I enjoy the vulture's span,
      The thunder of the avalanche's paces,
    Thou spakest to me--nor wast false like man,
      Thou spakest, but with stern and dreadful faces.

    Harsh goddess thou of Nature wild and stark,
      Mistress, that com'st with threats to daunt and quell me,
    To point me out the vulture's airy are
      And laughing avalanches, to repel me.
    Around us gnashing pants the lust to kill,
      The torment to win life in all its changes;
    Alluring on some cliff, abrupt and chill,
      Some flower craves the butterfly that ranges.

    All this am I--shuddering I feel it all--
      O butterfly beguiled, O lonely flower,
    The vulture and the ice-pent waterfall,
      The moaning storm--all symbols of thy power,--
    Thou goddess grim before whom deeply bowed,
      With head on knee, my lips with pæans bursting,
    I lift a dreadful song and cry aloud
      For Life, for Life, for Life--forever thirsting!

    O vengeful goddess, be not wroth, I ask,
      That I to mesh thee in my rhymes have striven.
    He trembles who beholds thine awful mask;
      He quails to whom thy dread right hand is given.
    Song upon trembling song by starts and fits
      I chant, in rhythm all my thought unfolding,
    The black ink flows, the pointed goose-quill spits,
      O goddess, goddess--leave me to my scolding!




    AFTER A NIGHT STORM[2]


    To-day in misty veils thou hangest dimly,
      Gloomy goddess, o'er my window-pane.
    Grimly whirl the pallid snow-flakes, grimly
      Roars the swollen brook unto the plain.

    Ah, by light of haggard levins glaring,
      'Neath the untamed thunder's roar and roll,
    'Midst the valley's murk wast thou preparing--
      Sorceress! thy dank and poisoned bowl.

    Shuddering, I heard through midnight breaking
      Raptures of thy voice--and howls of pain.
    Saw thy bright orbs gleam, thy right hand shaking
      With the mace of thunder hurled amain.

    Near my dreary couch I heard the crashes
      Of thine armoured steps, heard weapons slam,
    Heard thy brazen chain strike 'gainst the sashes,
      And thy voice: "Come! hearken who I am!

    The immortal Amazon they call me;
      All things weak and womanish I shun;
    Manly scorn and hate in war enthral me;
      Victress I and tigress all in one!

    Where I tread there corpses fall before me;
      From mine eyes the furious torches fly,
    And my brain thinks poisons. Bend, adore me!
      Worm of Earth and Will o' Wisp--or die!"




    HYMNS TO FRIENDSHIP


    (_Two Fragments_)


    1

    Goddess Friendship, deign to hear the song
      That we sing in friendship's honour!
    Where the eye of friendship glances,
      Filled with all the joy of friendship
      Come thou nigh to aid me,
    Rosy dawn in thy gaze and
    In holy hand the faithful pledge of youth eternal.


    2

    Morning's past: the sun of noonday
      Scorches with hot ray our heads.
    Let us sit beneath the arbour
    Singing songs in praise of friendship.
    Friendship was our life's red dawning,
      And its sunset red shall be.




    THE WANDERER[3]


    All through the night a wanderer walks
      Sturdy of stride,
    With winding vale and sloping height
      E'er at his side.
      Fair is the night:
    On, on he strides, nor slackens speed,
    And knows not where his path will lead.

    A bird's song in the night is heard,
    "Ah me, what hast thou done, O bird,
      How dost thou grip my sense and feet
      And pourest heart-vexation sweet
    Into mine ear--I must remain,
      To hearken fain:
    Why lure me with inviting strain?"

    The good bird speaks, staying his song:
    "I lure not thee,--no, thou art wrong--
      With these my trills
    I lure my mate from off the hills--
      Nor heed thy plight.
    To me alone the night's not fair.
    What's that to thee? Forth must thou fare,
    On, onward ever, resting ne'er.

      Why stand'st thou now?
    What has my piping done to thee,
      Thou roaming wight?"
    The good bird pondered, silent quite,
    "Why doth my piping change his plight?
      Why stands he now,
    That luckless, luckless, roaming wight?"




    TO THE GLACIER


    At noontide hour, when first,
    Into the mountains Summer treads,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary,
    Then too he speaks,
    Yet we can only see his speech.

    His breath is panting, like the sick man's breath
    On fevered couch.
    The glacier and the fir tree and the spring
    Answer his call
    --Yet we their answer only see.
    For faster from the rock leaps down
    The torrent stream, as though to greet,
    And stands, like a white column trembling,
    All yearning there.
    And darker yet and truer looks the fir-tree
    Than e'er before.
    And 'twixt the ice-mass and the cold grey stone
    A sudden light breaks forth--
    Such light I once beheld, and marked the sign.

    Even the dead man's eye
    Surely once more grows light,
    When, sorrowful, his child
    Gives him embrace and kiss:
    Surely once more the flame of light
    Wells out, and glowing into life
    The dead eye speaks: "My child!
    Ah child, you know I love you true!"

    So all things glow and speak--the glacier speaks,
    The brook, the fir,
    Speak with their glance the selfsame words:
    We love you true,
    Ah, child, you know we love you, love you true!

    And he,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary,
    Woe-worn, gives kisses
    More ardent ever,
    And will not go:
    But like to veils he blows his words
    From out his lips,
    His cruel words:
    "My greeting's parting,
    My coming going,
    In youth I die."

    All round they hearken
    And scarcely breathe
    (No songster sings),
    And shuddering run
    Like gleaming ray
    Over the mountain;
    All round they ponder,--
    Nor speak--

    Twas at the noon,
    At noontide hour, when first
    Into the mountains Summer treads,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary.




    AUTUMN[4]


    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!--
    The sun creeps 'gainst the hill
    And climbs and climbs
    And rests at every step.

    How faded grew the world!
    On weary, slackened strings the wind
    Playeth his tune.
    Fair Hope fled far--
    He waileth after.

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!
    O fruit of the tree,
    Thou tremblest, fallest?
    What secret whispered unto thee
    The Night,
    That icy shudders deck thy cheek,
    Thy cheek of purple hue?

    Silent art thou, nor dost reply--
    Who speaketh still?--

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!--
    "I am not fair,"--
    So speaks the lone star-flower,--
    "Yet men I love
    And comfort men--
    Many flowers shall they behold,
    And stoop to me,
    And break me, ah!--
    So that within their eyes shall gleam
    Remembrance swift,
    _Remembrance of far fairer things than I_:--
    I see it--see it--and I perish so."

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!




    CAMPO SANTO DI STAGLIENO[5]


    Maiden, in gentle wise
    You stroke your lamb's soft fleece,
    Yet flashing from your eyes
    Both light and flame ne'er cease.
    Creature of merry jest
    And favourite near and far,
    Pious with kindness blest,
          Amorosissima!

    What broke so soon the chain,
    What does your heart deplore?
    And who, pray, would not fain,
    If you loved him, adore?--
    You're mute, but from your eye,
    The tear-drop is not far,
    You're mute: you'll yearn and die,
          Amorosissima?




    THE LITTLE BRIG NAMED "LITTLE ANGEL"[6]


    "Little Angel" call they me!--
    Now a ship, but once a girl,
    Ah, and still too much a girl!
    My steering-wheel, so bright to see,
    But for sake of love doth whirl.

    "Little Angel" call they me,
    With hundred flags to ornament,
    A captain smart, on glory bent,
    Steers me, puffed with vanity
    (He himself's an ornament).

    "Little Angel" call they me,
    And where'er a little flame
    Gleams for me, I, like a lamb,
    Go my journey eagerly
    (I was always such a lamb!).

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Think you I can bark and whine
    Like a dog, this mouth of mine
    Throwing smoke and flame full free?
    Ah, a devil's mouth is mine.

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Once I spoke a bitter word,
    That my lover, when he heard,
    Fast and far away did flee:
    Yes, I killed him with that word!

    "Little Angel" call they me:
    Hardly heard, I sprang so glib
    From the cliff and broke a rib:
    From my frame my soul went free,
    Yes, escaped me through that rib.

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Then my soul, like cat in flight
    Straight did on this ship alight
    Swiftly bounding--one, two, three!
    Yes, its claws are swift to smite.

    "Little Angel" call they me!--
    Now a ship, but once a girl,
    Ah, and still too much a girl!
    My steering-wheel, so bright to see,
    For sake of love alone doth whirl.




    MAIDEN'S SONG


    Yesterday with seventeen years
    Wisdom reached I, a maiden fair,
    I am grey-haired, it appears,
    Now in all things--save my hair.

    Yesterday, I had a thought,
    Was't a thought?--you laugh and scorn!
    Did you ever have a thought?
    Rather was a feeling born.

    Dare a woman think? This screed
    Wisdom long ago begot:
    "Follow woman must, not lead;
    If she thinks, she follows not."

    Wisdom speaks--I credit naught:
    Rather hops and stings like flea:
    "Woman seldom harbours thought;
    If she thinks, no good is she!"

    To this wisdom, old, renowned,
    Bow I in deep reverence:
    Now my wisdom I'll expound
    In its very quintessence.

    A voice spoke in me yesterday
    As ever--listen if you can:
    "Woman is more beauteous aye,
    But more interesting--man!"




    "PIA, CARITATEVOLE, AMOROSISSIMA"[7]


    Cave where the dead ones rest,
    O marble falsehood, thee
    I love: for easy jest
    My soul thou settest free.

    To-day, to-day alone,
    My soul to tears is stirred,
    At thee, the pictured stone,
    At thee, the graven word.

    This picture (none need wis)
    I kissed the other day.
    When there's so much to kiss
    Why did I kiss the--clay?

    Who knows the reason why?
    "A tombstone fool!" you laugh:
    I kissed--I'll not deny--
    E'en the long epitaph.




    TO FRIENDSHIP


    Hail to thee, Friendship!
    My hope consummate,
    My first red daybreak!
    Alas, so endless
    Oft path and night seemed,
    And life's long road
    Aimless and hateful!
    Now life I'd double
    In thine eyes seeing
    Dawn-glory, triumph,
    Most gracious goddess!




    PINE TREE AND LIGHTNING


    O'er man and beast I grew so high,
    And speak--but none will give reply.

    Too lone and tall my crest did soar:
    I wait: what am I waiting for?

    The clouds are grown too nigh of late,
    'Tis the first lightning I await.




    TREE IN AUTUMN


    Why did ye, blockheads, me awaken
      While I in blissful blindness stood?
    Ne'er I by fear more fell was shaken--
      Vanished my golden dreaming mood.

    Bear-elephants, with trunks all greedy,
      Knock first! Where have your manners fled?
    I threw--and fear has made me speedy--
      Dishes of ripe fruit--at your head.




    AMONG FOES (OR AGAINST CRITICS)


    (_After a Gipsy Proverb_)


    Here the gallows, there the cord,
      And the hangman's ruddy beard.
    Round, the venom-glancing horde:--
      Nothing new to me's appeared.
    Many times I've seen the sight,
      Now laughing in your face I cry,
    "Hanging me is useless quite:
      Die? Nay, nay, I cannot die!"

    Beggars all! Ye envy me
      Winning what ye never won!
    True, I suffer agony,
      But for you--your life is done.
    Many times I've faced death's plight,
      Yet steam and light and breath am I.
    Hanging me is useless quite:
      Die? Nay, nay, I cannot die!




    THE NEW COLUMBUS[8]


    "Dearest," said Columbus, "never
      Trust a Genoese again.
    At the blue he gazes ever,
      Distance doth his soul enchain.

    Strangeness is to me too dear--
      Genoa has sunk and passed--
    Heart, be cool! Hand, firmly steer!
      Sea before me: land--at last?

    Firmly let us plant our feet,
      Ne'er can we give up this game--
    From the distance what doth greet?
      One death, one happiness, one fame.




    IN LONESOMENESS[9]


    The cawing crows
    Townwards on whirring pinions roam;
    Soon come the snows--
    Thrice happy now who hath a home!

    Fast-rooted there,
    Thou gazest backwards--oh, how long!
    Thou fool, why dare
    Ere winter come, this world of wrong?

    This world--a gate
    To myriad deserts dumb and hoar!
    Who lost through fate
    What thou hast lost, shall rest no more.

    Now stand'st thou pale,
    A frozen pilgrimage thy doom,
    Like smoke whose trail
    Cold and still colder skies consume.

    Fly, bird, and screech,
    Like desert-fowl, thy song apart!
    Hide out of reach,
    Fool! in grim ice thy bleeding heart.

    Firmly let us plant our feet,
      Ne'er can we give up this game--
    From the distance what doth greet?
      One death, one happiness, one fame.

    The cawing crows
      Townwards on whirring pinions roam:
    Soon come the snows--
      Woe unto him who hath no home!

    _My Answer_

    The man presumes--
      Good Lord!--to think that I'd return
    To those warm rooms
      Where snug the German ovens burn

    My friend, you see
      'Tis but thy folly drives me far,--
    Pity for _thee_
      And all that German blockheads are!




    VENICE


    ON the bridge I stood,
    Mellow was the night,
    Music came from far--
    Drops of gold outpoured
    On the shimmering waves.
    Song, gondolas, light,
    Floated a-twinkling out into the dusk.

    The chords of my soul, moved
    By unseen impulse, throbbed
    Secretly into a gondola song,
    With thrills of bright-hued ecstasy.
    Had I a listener there?


[Footnote 1: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 2: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 3: This poem was written on the betrothal of one of
Nietzsche's Bâle friends.--TR.]

[Footnote 4: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 5: Campo Santo di Staglieno is the cemetery of Staglieno,
near Genoa. The poem was inspired by the sight of a girl
with a lamb on the tombstone, with the words underneath--
"Pia, caritatevole, amorosissima."]

[Footnote 6: Published by Nietzsche himself. The poem was inspired
by a ship that was christened _Angiolina,_ in memory of a
love-sick girl who leapt into the sea.--TR.]

[Footnote 7: See above, p. 157. Both poems were inspired by the same
tombstone.--TR.]

[Footnote 8: The Genoese is Nietzsche himself, who lived a great
part of his life at Genoa.--TR.]

[Footnote 9: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]





EPIGRAMS



    CAUTION: POISON![1]


    He who cannot laugh at this had better not start reading;

    For if he read and do not laugh, physic he'll be needing!




    HOW TO FIND ONE'S COMPANY


    With jesters it is good to jest:
    Who likes to tickle, is tickled best.




    THE WORD


    I dearly love the living word,
    That flies to you like a merry bird,
    Ready with pleasant nod to greet,
    E'en in misfortune welcome, sweet,
    Yet it has blood, can pant you deep:
    Then to the dove's ear it will creep:
    And curl itself, or start for flight--
    Whate'er it does, it brings delight.

    Yet tender doth the word remain,
    Soon it is ill, soon well again:
    So if its little life you'd spare,
    O grasp it lightly and with care,
    Nor heavy hand upon it lay,
    For e'en a cruel glance would slay!
    There it would lie, unsouled, poor thing!
    All stark, all formless, and all cold,
    Its little body changed and battered,
    By death and dying rudely shattered.

    A dead word is a hateful thing,
    A barren, rattling, ting-ting-ting.
    A curse on ugly trades I cry
    That doom all little words to die!




    THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW


    _A Book_


    You'll ne'er go on nor yet go back?
    Is e'en for chamois here no track?

    So here I wait and firmly clasp
    What eye and hand will let me grasp!

    Five-foot-broad ledge, red morning's breath,
    And under me--world, man, and death!




    JOYFUL WISDOM


    This is no book--for such, who looks?
    Coffins and shrouds, naught else, are books!
    What's dead and gone they make their prey,
    Yet in my book lives fresh To-day.

    This is no book--for such, who looks?
    Who cares for coffins, shrouds, and spooks?
    This is a promise, an act of will,
    A last bridge-breaking, for good or ill;
    A wind from sea, an anchor light,
    A whirr of wheels, a steering right.
    The cannon roars, white smokes its flame,
    The sea--the monster--laughs and scents its game.




    DEDICATION[2]


    He who has much to tell, keeps much
      Silent and unavowed.
    He who with lightning-flash would touch
      Must long remain a cloud!




    THE NEW TESTAMENT[3]


    Is this your Book of Sacred Lore,
    For blessing, cursing, and such uses?--
    Come, come now: at the very door
    God some one else's wife seduces?




    THE "TRUE GERMAN"


    "O Peuple des meillures Tartuffes,
    To you I'm true, I wis."
    He spoke, but in the swiftest skiff
    Went to Cosmopolis.




    TO THE DARWINIANS[4]


    A fool this honest Britisher
    Was not ... But a Philosopher!
      As _that_ you really rate him?
    Set Darwin up by Goethe's side?
    But majesty you thus deride--
      _Genii majestatem_!




    To HAFIZ


    (_Toast Question of a Water-Drinker_)


    What you have builded, yonder inn,
      O'ertops all houses high:
    The posset you have brewed therein
      The world will ne'er drink dry.
    The bird that once appeared on earth
      As phœnix, is your, guest.
    The mouse that gave a mountain birth
      Is you yourself confessed!
    You're all and naught, you're inn and wine,
      You're phœnix, mountain, mouse.
    Back to yourself to come you pine
      Or fly from out your house.
    Downward from every height you've sunk,
      And in the depths still shine:
    The drunkenness of all the drunk,
      Why do you ask for--wine?




    TO SPINOZA


    Of "All in One" a fervent devotee
    _Amore Dei,_ of reasoned piety,
    Doff shoes! A land thrice holy this must be!--
    Yet underneath this love there sate
    A torch of vengeance, burning secretly
    The Hebrew God was gnawed by Hebrew hate.
    Hermit! Do I aright interpret thee?




    ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER


    That which he taught, has had its day,
    That which he lived, shall live for aye:
    Look at the man! No bondsman he!
    Nor e'er to mortal bowed his knee!




    TO RICHARD WAGNER


    O You who chafe at every fetter's link,
    A restless spirit, never free:
    Who, though victorious aye, in bonds still cowered,
    Disgusted more and more, and flayed and scoured,
    Till from each cup of balm you poison drink,
    Alas! and by the Cross all helpless sink,
    You too, you too, among the overpowered!

    For long I watched this play so weirdly shaped,
    Breathing an air of prison, vault, and dread,
    With churchly fragrance, clouds of incense spread,
    And yet I found all strange/in terror gaped.
    But now I throw my fool's cap o'er my head,
    For I escaped!




    MUSIC OF THE SOUTH[5]


    All that my eagle e'er saw clear,
    I see and feel in heart to-day
    (Although my hope was wan and gray)
    Thy song like arrow pierced mine ear,
    A balm to touch, a balm to hear,
    As down from heaven it winged its way.

    So now for lands of southern fire
    To happy isles where Grecian nymphs hold sport!
    Thither now turn the ship's desire--
    No ship e'er sped to fairer port.




    A RIDDLE


    A riddle here--can you the answer scent?
    "When man discovers, woman must invent."----




    TO FALSE FRIENDS


    You stole, your eye's not clear to-day.
    You only stole a thought, sir? nay,
    Why be so rudely modest, pray?
    Here, take another handful--stay,
    Take all I have, you swine--you may
    Eat till your filth is purged away.




    FRIEND YORICK


    Be of good cheer,
    Friend Yorick! If this thought gives pain,
    As now it does, I fear,
    Is it not "God"? And though in error lain,
    'Tis but your own dear child,
    Your flesh and blood,
    That tortures you and gives you pain,
    Your little rogue and do-no-good,
    See if the rod will change its mood!

    In brief, friend Yorick, leave that drear
    Philosophy--and let me now
    Whisper one word as medicine,
    My own prescription, in your ear,
    My remedy against such spleen--
    "Who loves his God, chastises him, I ween,"




    RESOLUTION


    I should be wise to suit my mood,
    Not at the beck of other men:
    God made as stupid as he could
    The world--well, let me praise him then.

    And if I make not straight my track,
    But, far as may be, wind and bend,
    That's how the sage begins his tack,
    And that is how the fool will--end.

         *     *     *     *     *

    The world stands never still,
    Night loves the glowing day--
    Sweet sounds to ear "I will!"
    And sweeter still "I may!"




    THE HALCYONIAN[6]


    Addressing me most bashfully,
      A woman to-day said this:
    "What would you be like in ecstasy,
      If sober you feel such bliss?"




    FINALE[6]


    Laughter is a serious art.
    I would do it better daily.
    Did I well to-day or no?
    Came the spark right from the heart?
    Little use though head wag gaily,
    If the heart contain no glow.



[Footnote 1: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 2: On the title-page of a copy of _Joyful Wisdom,_ dedicated
to Herr August Bungal.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 4: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 5: Probably written for Peter Gast, Nietzsche's faithful
friend, and a musician whose "Southern" music Nietzsche
admired.--TR.]

[Footnote 6: Translated by Francis Bickley.]




DIONYSUS-DITHYRAMBS


(1888)


These are the songs of Zarathustra which he sang to
himself so as to endure his last solitude.



    OF THE POVERTY OF THE RICHEST


    Ten years passed by--
    Not a drop reached me,
    No rain-fraught wind, no dew of love
    --A rainless land....
    Now entreat I my wisdom
    Not to become stingy in this drought;
    Overflow thyself, trickle thy dew,
    Be thyself the rain of the parched wilderness!

    I once bade the clouds
    Depart from my mountains;
    Once I said to them,
    "More light, ye dark ones!"
    To-day I entice them to come:
    Make me dark with your udders:
    --I would milk you,
    Ye cows of the heights!
    Milk-warm wisdom, sweet dew of love
    I pour over the land.

    Away, away, ye truths
    That look so gloomy!
    I will not have on my mountains
    Bitter, impatient truths.
    May truth approach me to-day
    Gilded by smiles,
    Sweetened by the sun, browned by love,--
    A ripe truth I would fain break off from the tree.

    To-day I stretch my hands
    Toward the tresses of chance,
    Wise enough to lead,
    To outwit chance like a child.
    To-day I will be hospitable
    'Gainst the unwelcome,
    'Gainst destiny itself I will not be prickly....
    --Zarathustra is no hedgehog.

    My soul,
    Insatiable with its tongue,
    Has already tasted of all things good and evil,
    And has dived into all depths.
    But ever, like the cork,
    It swims to the surface again,
    And floats like oil upon brown seas:
    Because of this soul men call me fortunate.

    Who are my father and mother?
    Is not my father Prince Plenty?
    And my mother Silent Laughter?
    Did not the union of these two
    Beget me, the enigmatic beast--
    Me, the monster of light--
    Me, Zarathustra, the squanderer of all wisdom?

    Sick to-day from tenderness,
    A dewy wind,
    Zarathustra sits waiting, waiting on his mountains--
    Sweet and stewing
    In his own juice,
    Beneath his own summit,
    Beneath his ice,
    Weary and happy,
    A Creator on his seventh day.

    --Silence!
    A truth passes over me
    Like a cloud,--
    With invisible lightnings it strikes me,
    On broad, slow stairs,
    Its happiness climbs to me:
    Come, come, beloved truth!

    --Silence!
    'Tis _my_ truth!
    From timid eyes,
    From velvet shudders,
    Her glance meets mine,
    Sweet and wicked, a maiden's glance.
    She has guessed the reason of my happiness,
    She has guessed me--ha! what is she thinking?
    A purple dragon
    Lurks in the abyss of her maiden's glance.

    --Silence! My truth is speaking!--

    "Woe to thee, Zarathustra!
    Thou lookest like one
    That hath swallowed gold:
    They will slit up thy belly yet!

    Thou art too rich,
    Thou corrupter of many!
    Thou makest too many jealous,
    Too many poor....
    Even on me thy light casts a shadow--
    I feel chill: go away, thou rich one
    Go away, Zarathustra, from the path of thy sun




    BETWEEN BIRDS OF PREY


    Who would here descend,
    How soon
    Is he swallowed up by the depths!
    But thou, Zarathustra,
    Still lovest the abysses,
    Lovest them as doth the fir tree!

    The fir flings its roots
    Where the rock itself gazes
    Shuddering at the depths,--
    The fir pauses before the abysses
    Where all around
    Would fain descend:
    Amid the impatience
    Of wild, rolling, leaping torrents
    It waits so patient, stern and silent,
    Lonely....

    Lonely!
    Who would venture
    Here to be guest--
    To be thy guest?

    A bird of prey, perchance
    Joyous at others' misfortune,
    Will cling persistent
    To the hair of the steadfast watcher,
    With frenzied laughter,
    A vulture's laughter....

    Wherefore so steadfast?
    --Mocks he so cruel:
    He must have wings, who loves the abyss,
    He must not stay on the cliff,
    As thou who hangest there!--

    O Zarathustra,
    Cruellest Nimrod!
    Of late still a hunter of God,
    A spider's web to capture virtue,
    An arrow of evil!
    Now
    Hunted by thyself,
    Thine own prey
    Caught in the grip of thine own soul.

    Now
    Lonely to me and thee,
    Twofold in thine own knowledge,
    Mid a hundred mirrors
    False to thyself,
    Mid a hundred memories
    Uncertain,
    Weary at every wound,
    Shivering at every frost,
    Throttled in thine own noose,
    Self-knower!
    Self-hangman!

    Why didst bind thyself
    With the noose of thy wisdom?
    Why luredst thyself
    Into the old serpent's paradise?
    Why stolest into
    Thyself, thyself?...

    A sick man now,
    Sick of serpent's poison,
    A captive now
    Who hast drawn the hardest lot:
    In thine own shaft
    Bowed as thou workest,
    In thine own cavern
    Digging at thyself,
    Helpless quite,
    Stiff,
    A cold corse
    Overwhelmed with a hundred burdens,
    Overburdened by thyself,
    A knower!
    A self-knower!
    The wise Zarathustra!...

    Thou soughtest the heaviest burden,
    So foundest thou thyself,
    And canst not shake thyself off....

    Watching,
    Chewing,
    One that stands upright no more!
    Thou wilt grow deformed even in thy grave,
    Deformed spirit!

    And of late still so proud
    On all the stilts of thy pride!
    Of late still the godless hermit,
    The hermit with one comrade--the devil,
    The scarlet prince of every devilment!...

    Now--
    Between two nothings
    Huddled up,
    A question-mark,
    A weary riddle,
    A riddle for vultures....
    They will "solve" thee,
    They hunger already for thy "solution,"
    They flutter already about their "riddle,"
    About thee, the doomed one!
    O Zarathustra,
    Self-knower!
    Self-hangman!




    THE SUN SINKS


    I

    Not much longer thirstest thou,
    O burnt-up heart!
    Promise is in the air,
    From unknown mouths I feel a breath,
    --The great coolness comes....
    My sun stood hot above me at noonday:
    A greeting to you that are coming,
    Ye sudden winds,
    Ye cool spirits of afternoon!

    The air is strange and pure.
    See how the night
    Leers at me with eyes askance,
    Like a seducer!...
    Be strong, my brave heart,
    And ask not "Why?"


    2

    The day of my life!
    The sun sinks,
    And the calm flood
    Already is gilded.
    Warm breathes the rock:
    Did happiness at noonday
    Take its siesta well upon it?
    In green light
    Happiness still glimmers up from the brown abyss

    Day of my life!
    Eventide's nigh,
    Thy eye already
    Glows half-broken,
    Thy dew already
    Pours out its tear-drops,
    Already over the white seas
    Walks the purple of thy love,
    Thy last hesitating holiness....


    3

    Golden gaiety, come!
    Thou, the sweetest foretaste--
    Foretaste of death!
    --Went I my way too swiftly?
    Now that the foot grows weary,
    Thine eye still catches me,
    Thy happiness still catches me.

    Around but waves and play.
    Whatever was hard
    --Sank into blue oblivion.
    My boat now stands idle.
    Storm and motion--how did it forget them!
    Desire and Hope are drowned,
    Sea and soul are becalmed.

    Seventh Solitude!
    Never felt!
    Sweet certainty nearer,
    Or warmer the sun's ray.
    --Glows not the ice of my summit yet?
    Silvery, light, a fish
    Now my vessel swims out....




    THE LAST DESIRE[1]


    So would I die
    As then I saw him die,
    The friend, who like a god
    Into my darkling youth
    Threw lightning's light and fire:
    Buoyant yet deep was he,
    Yea, in the battle's strife
    With the gay dancer's heart.

    Amid the warriors
    His was the lightest heart,
    Amid the conquerors
    His brow was dark with thought--
    He was a fate poised on his destiny:
    Unbending, casting thought into the past
    And future, such was he.

    Fearful beneath the weight of victory,
    Yet chanting, as both victory and death
    Came hand and hand to him.

    Commanding even as he lay in death,
    And his command that man annihilate.

    So would I die
    As then I saw him die,
    Victorious and destroying.




    THE BEACON


    Here, where the island grew amid the seas,
    A sacrificial rock high-towering,
    Here under darkling heavens,
    Zarathustra lights his mountain-fires,
    A beacon for ships that have strayed,
    A beacon for them that have an answer!...

    These flames with grey-white belly,
    In cold distances sparkle their desire,
    Stretches its neck towards ever purer heights--
    A snake upreared in impatience:
    This signal I set up there before me.
    This flame is mine own soul,
    Insatiable for new distances,
    Speeding upward, upward its silent heat.

    Why flew Zarathustra from beasts and men?
    Why fled he swift from all continents?
    Six solitudes he knows already--
    But even the sea was not lonely enough for him,
    On the island he could climb, on the mount he
        became flame,
    At the seventh solitude
    He casts a fishing-rod far o'er his head.

    Storm-tossed seamen! Wreckage of ancient stars
    Ye seas of the future! Uncompassed heavens!
    At all lonely ones I now throw my fishing-rod.
    Give answer to the flame's impatience,
    Let me, the fisher on high mountains,
    Catch my seventh, last solitude!----




    FAME AND ETERNITY[2]


    I

    Speak, tell me, how long wilt thou brood
    Upon this adverse fate of thine?
    Beware, lest from thy doleful mood
    A countenance _90_ dark is brewed
    That men in seeing thee divine
    A hate more bitter than the brine.
        *     *     *     *
    Speak, why does Zarathustra roam
    Upon the towering mountain-height?
    Distrustful, cankered, dour, his home
    Is shut so long from human sight?
        *     *     *     *
    See, suddenly flames forth a lightning-flash,
    The pit profound with thunderous challenge fights
    Against the heavens, midst clamorous crack and crash
    Of the great mountain! Cradled in the heights,
    Born as the fruit of hate and lightning's love,
    The wrath of Zarathustra dwells above
    And looms with menace of a thundercloud.
        *     *     *     *
    Ye, who have roofs, go quickly, creep and hide!
    To bed, ye tenderlings! For thunders loud
    Upon the blasts of storm triumphant ride,
    And bastions and ramparts sway and rock,

    The lightning sears the dusky face of night,
    And eerie truths like gleams of Hades mock
    The sense familiar. So in storm breaks forth
    The flaming curse of Zarathustra's wrath.


    2

    This fame, which all the wide world loves,
    I touch with gloves,
    And scorning beat
    Beneath my feet.
        *     *     *     *
    Who hanker after the pay of it?
    Who cast themselves in the way of it?
    These prostitutes to gold,
    These merchant folk. They fold
    Their unctuous palms over the jingling fame,
    Whose ringing chink wins all the world's acclaim.
        *     *     *     *
    Hast thou the lust to buy? It needs no skill.
    They are all venal. Let thy purse be deep,
    And let their greedy paws unhindered creep
    Into its depths. So let them take their fill,
    For if thou dost not offer them enough,
    Their "virtue" they'll parade, to hide their huff.
        *     *     *     *
    They are all virtuous, yea every one.
    Virtue and fame are ever in accord
    So long as time doth run,

    The tongues that prate of virtue as reward
    Earn fame. For virtue is fame's clever bawd.
        *     *     *     *
    Amongst these virtuous, I prefer to be
    One guilty of all vile and horrid sin!
    And when I see fame's importunity
    So advertise her shameless harlotry,
    Ambition turns to gall. Amidst such kin
    One place alone, the lowest, would I win.
        *     *     *     *
    This fame, which all the wide world loves,
    I touch with gloves,
    And scorning beat
    Beneath my feet.


    3

    Hush! I see vastness!--and of vasty things
    Shall man be dumb, unless he can enshrine
    Them with his words? Then take the might which brings
    The heart upon thy tongue, charmed wisdom mine!
        *     *     *     *
    I look above, there rolls the star-strown sea.
    O night, mute silence, voiceless cry of stars!
    And lo! A sign! The heaven its verge unbars--
    A shining constellation falls towards me.


    4

    O loftiest, star-clustered crown of Being!
    O carved tablets of Eternity!
    And dost thou truly bend thy way to me?
    Thy loveliness, to all--obscurity,
    What? Fear'st not to unveil before _my_ seeing?
        *     *     *     *
    O shield of Destiny!
    O carven tablets of Eternity!
    Yea, verily, thou knowest--what mankind doth hate,
    What I alone do love: thou art inviolate
    To strokes of change and time, of fates the fate!
    'Tis only thou, O dire Necessity,
    Canst kindle everlasting love in me!
        *     *     *     *
    O loftiest crown of Life! O shield of Fate!
    That no desire can reach to invocate,
    That ne'er defiled or sullied is by Nay,
    Eternal Yea of life, for e'er am I thy Yea:
    For I love thee, Eternity!


[Footnote 1: Translated by Dr. G. T. Wrench.]

[Footnote 2: Translated by Dr. G. T. Wrench.]




FRAGMENTS OF DIONYSUS-DITHYRAMBS

(1882-88)


SPEECHES, PARABLES, AND SIMILES


    3

    My home's in the highlands,
    For the highlands I yearn not,
    I raise not mine eyes aloft:
    I am one that looks downward,
    One that must bless,--All
    blessers look downward.


    11

    Thus I began,
    I unlearned all self-pity!


    13

    Not in shattering idols,
    But in shattering the idol-worshipper in thee,
    Consisted thy valour.


    14

    See, there stand
    Those heavy cats of granite,
    Those old, old Values.
    Woe is me! How overthrow them?
       *   *   *   *
    Scratching cats,
    With paws that are fettered,
    There they sit
    And their glance is poison.


    17

    A lightning-flash became my wisdom:
    With sword of adamant it clove me every
        darkness!


    19

    A thought that still
    Flows hot, like lava:
    But all streams of lava
    Build a fortress around them,
    And every thought finally
    Oppresses itself with laws.


    20

    Such is my will:
    And since 'tis my will,
    All goes as I wish--
    That was my final wisdom:
    I willed what I must,
    And thus I forced every "must,"--
    Since then has been for me no "must."


    23

    Deceit
    Is war's whole art
    The fox's skin
    Is my secret shirt of mail


    25

    We of the new underworld
    Grub for new treasures.
    Godless it seemed to the ancients
    To disturb the earth's bowels for treasures
    And once more this godlessness revives,
    Hear ye not earth's bowels thunder?


    28

    Looking for love and finding masks,
    Finding accursed masks and having to break them!


    29

    Do I love you?
    Yes, as the rider loves his steed,
    That carryeth him to his goal.


    30

    His pity is cruel,
    His loving hand-clasp bruises,
    Give not a giant your hand!


    31

    Ye fear me?
    Ye fear the taut-strung bow?
    Ye fear a man might set his arrow to the bow?


    33

    I am naught but a word-maker.
    What matter words?
    What matter I?


    34

    Ah, my friends,
    Whither has flown all that is called "good"?
    Whither all good people?
    Whither the innocence of all these falsehoods?
    I call all good,
    Leaves and grass, happiness, blessing, and rain.


    35

    Not through his sins and greatest follies.
    Through his perfection I suffered,
    As I suffered most from men.[1]


    36

    "Man is evil."
    So spake the wisest
    For my consolement.


    37

    And only when I to myself am a burden
    Do ye fall heavy upon me!


    38

    Too soon, already
    I laugh again:
    For a foe 'tis easy
    To make me amends.


    39

    Gentle am I towards man and chance;
    Gentle with all men, and even with grasses:
    A spot of sunshine on winter curtains,
    Moist with tenderness,
    A thawing wind to snow-bound souls:
        *    *    *    *
    Proud-minded towards trifling
    Gains, where I see the huckster's long finger,
    'Tis aye my pleasure
    To be bamboozled:
    Such is the bidding of my fastidious taste.


    40

    A strange breath breathes and spits at me,
    Am I a mirror, that straightway is clouded?


    41

    Little people,
    Confiding, open-hearted,
    But low-built portals,
    Where only the low of stature can enter.
        *    *    *    *
    How can I get through the city-gate
    Who had forgotten to live among dwarfs?


    42

    My wisdom was like to the sun,
    I longed to give them light,
    But I only deceived them.
    The sun of my wisdom
    Blinded the eyes
    Of these poor bats....


    43

    Blacker and eviller things didst thou see than ever
        a seer did:
    Through the revels of Hell no sage had ever
        journeyed.


    44

    Back! on my heels too closely ye follow!
    Back! lest my wisdom should tread on you, crush
       you!


    45

    "He goes to hell who goes thy ways!"
    So be it I to my hell
    I'll pave the way myself with well-made maxims.


    46

    Your God, you tell me,
    Is a God of love?
    The sting of conscience
    A sting from God?
    A sting of love?


    48

    They chew gravel,
    They lie on their bellies
    Before little round things,
    They adore all that falleth not down--
    These last servants of God
    Believers (in reality)!


    50

    They made their God out of nothing,
    What wonder if now he is naught?


    51

    Ye loftier men! There have once been
    More thoughtful times, more reflective,
    Than is our to-day and to-morrow.


    52
    Our time is like a sick woman--
    Let her but shriek, rave, scold,
    And break the tables and dishes!


    54

    Ye mount?
    Is it true that ye mount,
    Ye loftier men?

    Are ye not, pray,
    Like to a ball
    Sped to the heights
    By the lowest that's in you?
    Do ye not flee from yourselves, O ye climbers?


    55

    All that you thought
    You had to despise,
    Where you only renounced!


    56

    All men repeat the refrain!
    No, no, and thrice say No!
    What's all this yap-yap talk of heaven?
    We would not enter the kingdom of heaven,
    The kingdom of earth shall be ours?


    57

    The will redeemeth,
    He that has nothing to do
    In a Nothing finds food for trouble.


    58

    You cannot endure it more,
    Your tyrannous destiny,
    Love it--you're given no choice!


    59

    These alone free us from woes
    (Choose now I)
    Sudden death
    Or long-drawn-out love.


    60

    Of death we are sure,
    So why not be merry?


    61

    The worst of pleas
    I have hidden from you--that life grew tedious!
    Throw it away, that ye find it again to your taste!


    62

    Lonely days,
    Ye must walk on valorous feet!


    63

    Loneliness
    Plants naught, it ripens....
    And even then you must have the sun for your
    friend.


    64

    Once more must ye plunge in the throng--In
    the throng ye grow hard and smooth.
    Solitude withers
    And lastly destroys.--


    65

    When on the hermit comes the great fear;
    When he runs and runs
    And knows not whither;
    When the storms roar behind
    And the lightning bears witness against him,
    And his cavern breeds spectres
    And fills him with dread.


    67

    Throw thy pain in the depths,
    Man, forget! Man, forget!
    Divine is the art of forgetting!
    Wouldst fly?
    Wouldst feel at home in the heights?
    Throw thy heaviest load in the sea!
    Here is the sea, hurl thyself in the sea!
    Divine is the art of forgetting!


    69

    Look forward, never look back!
    We sink to the depths
    If we peer ever into the depths.


    70

    Beware, beware
    Of warning the reckless!
    Thy warning will drive them
    To leap into every abyss!

    71

    Why hurled he himself from the heights?
    What led him astray?
    His pity for all that is lowly led him astray,
    And now he lies there, broken, useless, and cold.

    72

    Whither went he? Who knows?
    We only know that he sank.
    A star went out in the desolate void,
    And lone was the void.


    73

    What we have not
    But need,
    We must take.
    And so a good conscience I took.


    74

    Who is there that could bestow right upon thee?
    So take thy right!


    75

    O ye waves,
    Wondrous waves, are ye wroth with me?
    Do ye raise me your crests in wrath?
    With my rudder I smite
    Your folly full square.
    This bark ye yourselves
    To immortal life will carry along.


    77

    When no new voice was heard,
    Ye made from old words
    A law:
    When life grows stark, there shoots up the law.


    78

    What none can refute
    Ye say must be true?
    Oh, ye innocents!


    79

    Art thou strong?
    Strong as an ass? Strong as God?
    Art thou proud?
    So proud as to flaunt
    Unashamed thy conceit?


    80

    Beware,
    And ne'er beat the drum
    Of thy destiny I
    Go out of the way
    From all pom-pom of fame!
        *    *    *    *
    Be not known too soon!
    Be one that has hoarded renown!


    81

    Wilt thou grasp at the thorns?
    Thy fingers must pay.
    Grasp at a poniard.


    85

    Be a tablet of gold,
    They will grave upon thee
    In golden script.


    86

    Upright he stands
    With more sense of "justice"
    In his outermost toe
    Than I have in all my head.
    A virtue-monster
    Mantled in white.


    87

    Already he mimics himself,
    Already weary he grows,
    Already he seeks the paths he has trod--
    Who of late still loved all tracks untrodden!

    Secretly burnt--
    Not for his faith,
    Rather because he had lost the heart
    To find new faith.


    88

    Too long he sat in the cage,
    That runaway!
    Too long he dreaded
    A gaoler!

    Timorous now he goeth his ways,
    All things make him to stumble--
    The shadow e'en of a stick makes him to stumble.


    89

    Ye chambers smoky and musty,
    Ye cages and narrow hearts,
    How could your spirit be free?


    90

    Narrow souls!
    Huckster-souls!
    When money leaps into the box
    The soul leaps into it too![2]


    92

    Are ye women,
    That ye wish to suffer
    From that which ye love?


    99

    They are cold, these men of learning!
    Would that a lightning-flash might strike their food,
    And their mouths could learn to eat fire!


    101

    Your false love
    For the past,
    A love for the graves of the dead,
    Is a theft from life
    That steals all the future.
        *    *    *    *
    An antiquary
    Is a craftsman of dead things,
    Who lives among coffins and skeletons.


    103

    Only the poet who can lie
    Wilfully, skilfully,
    Can tell the truth.


    104

    Our chase after truth,
    Is't a chase after happiness?


    105

    Truth
    Is a woman, no better,
    Cunning in her shame:
    Of what she likes best
    She will know naught,
    And covers her face....
    To what doth she yield
    But to violence?
    Violence she needs.
    Be hard, ye sages!
    Ye must compel her,
    That shamefaced Truth....
    For her happiness
    She needs constraint--She
    is a woman, no better.


    106

    We thought evil of each other?
    We were too distant,
    But now in this tiny hut,
    Pinned to one destiny,
    How could we still be foes?
    We must needs love those
    Whom we cannot escape.


    107

    Love thy foe,
    Let the robber rob thee:
    The woman hears and--does it.


    110

    A proud eye
    With silken curtains,
    Seldom clear,
    Honours him that may see it unveiled.


    111

    Sluggard eyes
    That seldom love--
    But when they love, the levin flashes
    As from shafts of gold
    Where a dagger keeps guard at the treasure of love.


    117

    They are crabs, for whom I have no fellow-feeling.
    Grasp them, they pinch you;
    Leave them alone, and they walk backward.


    119

    Crooked go great rivers and men,
    Crooked, but turned to their goal;
    That is their highest courage,
    They dreaded not crooked paths.


    121

    Wouldst catch them?
    Then speak to them
    As to stray sheep:
    "Your path, your path
    You have lost!"
    They follow all
    That flatter them so:
    "What? had we a path?"
    Each whispers the other:
    "It really seems that we have a path."


[The numbering given corresponds to that of the original,
several fragments having been omitted.--TR.]


[Footnote 1: Nietzsche here alludes to Christian perfection, which he
considers equivalent to harmlessness.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: Alluding to the saying of the Dominican monk Tetzel,
who sold indulgences in the time of Luther: "When money
leaps into the box, the soul leaps from hell to heaven!"--TR.]




HYMN TO LIFE.

_For Chorus and Orchestra._
WORDS BY LOU SALOMÉ. MUSIC BY FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.
Trans. BY HERMAN SCHEFFAUER. Arr. for Piano BY ADRIAN COLLINS. M.A.

[Illustration: score and lyrics]







End of Project Gutenberg's Ecce Homo, by Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ECCE HOMO ***

***** This file should be named 52190-0.txt or 52190-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/1/9/52190/

Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Hathi Trust.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook, Siddhartha, by Hermann Hesse, Translated by
David Wyllie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **




Title: Siddhartha
       A Poem of India


Author: Hermann Hesse



Release Date: November 24, 2018  [eBook #58344]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIDDHARTHA***


Copyright (C) 2018 by David Wyllie.



This translation is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which appears below and may be found online at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/


			      SIDDHARTHA
			   A poem of India

by Hermann Hesse

Translated into English by David Wyllie


PART ONE

Dedicated to my revered friend, Romain Rolland


THE BRAHMIN’S SON

In the shade of the house, in the sunshine on the river bank where the
boats were, in the shade of the forest of shala trees, in the shade of the
fig tree, this is where Siddhartha grew up, the brahmin’s most handsome
son, the young falcon, alongside his friend Govinda, the brahmin’s son.
His pale shoulders were bronzed by the sunshine on the river bank, when he
was bathing, when performing ceremonious ablutions, when making holy
sacrifices. Shadow flowed into his dark eyes in the mango groves, when
playing boyish games, when his mother sang, when he talked with the wise
ones. Siddhartha spent many hours in conversation with the wise ones, he
practised his skills of rhetoric with Govinda, practised the art of
thought with Govinda, in order to achieve mystic contemplation. He was
already able to utter the holy word, Om, in silence, the word of words, in
silence to utter it and draw it in with his breath, in silence to utter it
and send it out with his breath, his mind collected, his brow surrounded
with the light of the clear-thinking soul. He was already able to
understand, in his innermost being, the nature of Atman, indestructible,
at one with the universe.

Joy sprang up in his father’s heart when he saw his son, the learned
one, the one with a thirst for knowledge, joy sprang up when he foretold
that he would grow into a wise man and a priest, a prince among the
brahmins.

Bliss sprang up in his mother’s breast when she saw her son, when she
saw him walk, when she saw him sit down and stand up, Siddhartha, the
strong one, the handsome one, walking on his slender legs, when, with
perfect decorum, he her offered her his greetings.

Love was stirred in the hearts of the brahmins’ daughters when they saw
Siddhartha walk through the streets of the town, his luminous brow, the
eyes of a king, his narrow hips.

But the one who loved him more than all the others was Govinda, his
friend, the brahmin’s son. He loved Siddhartha’s eyes and his noble
voice, he loved his walk and the perfect grace of his movements, he loved
everything that Siddhartha did or said, and most of all he loved his soul,
his lofty and fiery thoughts, the bright glow of his will, his lofty
vocation. Govinda knew that Siddhartha would never become a mediocre
brahmin, no lazy officiator of sacrifices, no greedy peddler of magic
spells, no rhetorician of vain and empty speech, no sly or malevolent
priest, and also never become a good but stupid sheep in the flock of
many. No, and he too, Govinda, had no wish to become one such, not one of
those brahmans that are numbered in their thousands. He wanted to be a
follower of Siddhartha, the beloved, the noble. And if Siddhartha ever
became a god, if he ever went to join the luminous ones, then Govinda
would follow him, as his friend, as his companion, as his servant, as his
spear carrier, his shadow.

Everyone loved Siddhartha in the same way. To everyone he brought joy.

To himself, though, Siddhartha did not bring joy. Wandering between the
roses in the fig garden, sitting in the bluish shade in the grove of
contemplation, washing his limbs in his daily act of atonement, performing
sacrifice in the dark shade of the mango wood, all his movements as they
should be, loved by all, joy to all, he nonetheless carried no joy in his
own heart. Tears came to him, restless thoughts came to him from the water
of the river as it flowed, from the stars of the night as they sparkled,
from the rays of the Sun as they blazed, dreams came to him and a
restlessness of the soul, from the smoke of his sacrifices, from the
verses of the Rig Veda as he breathed them, from the teachings of the
ancient brahmins as they seeped into him.

Siddhartha had begun to nurture discontent in himself. He had begun to
feel that his father’s love, and his mother’s love, and the love of
his friend, Govinda, would not always and for all time bring him
happiness, calm him, satisfy him, be enough for him. He had begun to see
that his venerable father and his other teachers, the wise brahmins, had
already given him almost all of their wisdom, all the best of their
wisdom, that their fullness had already been poured into his vessel,
receptive and ready to accept it, and that the vessel was not full, the
spirit was not satisfied, the soul was not quieted, the heart was not at
peace. The washings were good, but they were water, they did not wash sins
away, they did not assuage the thirst of the soul, they did not dispel the
pain of the heart. Most important of all were the sacrifices and the call
of the gods - but was that all? Did the sacrifices bring happiness? And
how did the gods feel about that? Was it really Prajapati who had created
the world? Was it not Atman, him, the only one, the all-in-one? Were the
gods not forms that had been created like you and me, subject to time,
mortal? So was it good to make sacrifice to the gods, was it proper, was
it a meaningful and elevated act? Whom else would you make sacrifice to,
whom else should you offer your veneration to other than Him, the one and
only, Atman? And where was Atman to be found, where did He live, where did
His eternal heart beat, where else but in the Self, in the Deepest, in the
Indestructible that every man carried in himself? But where, where was
this Self, this Deepest, this Ultimate? It was not made of flesh and bone,
it was not thought or consciousness, that is was the wisest men taught.
Where, where was it then? To pierce through to the Self, to me, to Atman -
was there any other way worth seeking out? But no-one showed him this way,
no-one knew it, not his father, not his teachers or the wise men, not the
sacred songs of sacrifice! They knew everything, the brahmins and their
holy books, knew everything, they had made great efforts into everything
and into more than everything, the creation of the world, the origins of
speech, food, breathing in and breathing out, the hierarchy of sins, the
acts of the gods - their knowledge was boundless - but was it worth
knowing all of this when there was one single thing they did not know, the
thing of highest importance, the only thing of importance?

It was true that many verses in the holy scriptures, magnificent verses
such as the Upanishads of the Samaveda, spoke of this deepest and ultimate
thing. “Your soul is the entire world,” was written there, and it was
written that man in his sleep, deep sleep, enters into his deepest part
and lives in Atman. Great wisdom was written in these verses, all the
knowledge of the wisest was collected here and presented in words of
magic, as pure as the honey collected from the bees. No, the enormous
amount of knowledge here, assembled and preserved through countless
generations of wise brahmins, was not to be under-valued. - but where were
the brahmins, where were the priests, where were the wise men and the
penitents who had succeeded not only in learning this deepest wisdom but
in living it? Where was the gifted one who, by his magic, would draw the
essence of Atman out of its sleep and make it alert, something that was
alive in its coming and going, in word and deed? Siddhartha knew many
venerable brahmins, most of all he knew his father, the pure one, the
learned one, the most venerable of all. His father was an admirable man,
quiet and noble in his manner, pure his life, wise his words, in his brow
lived fine and noble thoughts - but even he, who had so much knowledge;
Did he live in holiness, was he at peace, was he, too, not just another
seeker, just another thirsty one? Did he not, over and again, need to go
to the well to assuage his thirst, did he not need to make sacrifice, read
books and debate his beliefs with the brahmins? Why did he, the immaculate
one, need to wash his sins away every day, strive to become pure every
day, every day again and again? Was Atman not a part of him, did the
source not flow into his heart? The source of all things had to be found,
the source within us all, it had to be taken into ourselves! All else was
mere seeking, mere straying from the path, mere delusion.

These were the thoughts of Siddhartha, this was his thirst, this was his
sorrow.

He would often recite the words from one of the Chandogya Upanishads:
“Forsooth, the name of Brahman is Satyam - forsooth, he who knows such
things goeth daily into the world of Heaven.” The world of Heaven often
seemed near to him, but he had never quite been able to reach it, never
been able to quench the ultimate thirst. And from all the wise men he
knew, even from the wisest of all, whose teachings he enjoyed, there was
not one who ever had quite reached it, the world of Heaven, which would
have quenched the ultimate thirst for him.

“Govinda,” said Siddhartha to his friend, “Govinda, dear friend,
come with me under the banyan tree, we have to nurture our skill of
contemplation.”

They went to the Banyan tree, they sat down beneath it, Siddhartha here
and, twenty paces away, sat Govinda. As he sat down in preparedness to
utter the word ‘Om,’ Siddhartha repeatedly muttered the verse:

  Om is the bow, the arrow is the soul,
  Brahman is the arrow’s goal,
  The goal to reach directly.

After they had practised contemplation for their usual length of time
Govinda stood. The evening had come, it was time to wash in preparation
for the evening. He called out Siddhartha’s name. Siddhartha gave no
answer. Siddhartha sat deep in contemplation, his eyes were fixed on a
greatly distant object, the tip of his tongue protruded slightly from
between his teeth, he seemed not to be breathing. So he sat, engrossed in
contemplation, his mind fixed on Om, his soul as the arrow sent out to
Brahman.

One day samanas came through the town where Siddhartha lived, travelling
ascetics, three men wizened and close to death, neither old nor young,
their shoulders were bloody and dusty, they were nearly naked and they
were scorched by the sun, an air of loneliness about them, alien to this
world and the enemy of the world, strangers, emaciated jackals in the
empire of man. The odour of quiet suffering blew in from behind them, of
service that destroyed, of pitiless loss of self.

That evening, after their hour of contemplation, Siddhartha said to
Govinda, “Tomorrow morning, my friend, Siddhartha will go to the
samanas. He will become a samana.”

When Govinda heard these words and saw the unshakable resolution in his
friend’s face he turned pale. Siddhartha could no more be dissuaded from
his course than the arrow speeding from the bow. Just as soon as he saw
this, Govinda knew that this was where it started, Siddhartha would now go
on his way, now his destiny would begin to grow, and with Siddhartha’s
destiny so would Govinda’s. And he became as pale as a dried banana
skin.

Oh, Siddhartha,” he exclaimed, “will your father allow that?”

Siddhartha looked back at him as one who was awakening. With the speed of
an arrow he saw the fear, saw the resignation in Govinda’s soul.

“Oh, Govinda,” he said gently, “let us not waste words. Tomorrow, at
the break of day, I will embark on the life of a samana. Let us talk no
more about it.”

Siddhartha went into the room where his father sat on a raffia mat and
stood behind him until his father could feel that he was there. The
brahmin said, “Is that you, Siddhartha? Say what it is you have come to
tell me.”

Siddhartha answered, “If you will allow it, father, I have come to tell
you that I have been called on to leave your house in the morning and to
go among the ascetics. It is my vocation to become a samana. I hope my
father will not be opposed to this.”

The brahmin was silent, and remained silent so long that, before the
silence in the room came to an end, the stars outside the little window
had moved across the sky and formed new shapes. His son remained there,
speechless and immobile, his arms crossed, the father sat there on the
mat, speechless and immobile, while the stars made their way across the
sky. Finally, Siddhartha’s father spoke. “It is not seemly for a
brahmin to speak loud and angry words, but my heart is moved to oppose
this. I do not want to hear this request from your mouth a second time.”

Slowly, the brahmin got to his feet, Siddhartha stood in silence, his arms
crossed.

“What are you waiting for?” his father asked.

Siddhartha said, “You know what I am waiting for.”

Displeased, his father left the room, displeased he went to his bed and
lay himself down.

An hour passed, as no sleep came to his eyes, the brahmin stood up, paced
to and fro, left the house. He looked in through the little window of the
room, there he saw Siddhartha standing, his arms crossed, unchanged. His
upper clothing shone palely. Unease in his heart, Siddhartha’s father
went back to his bed.

Another hour passed, as no sleep came to his eyes, the brahmin stood up
again, paced to and fro, went to the front of the house, saw that the moon
had risen. He looked in through the little window of the room, there he
saw Siddhartha standing, resolute, his arms crossed, moonlight reflecting
from his bare legs. With worry in his heart, Siddhartha’s father went
back to his bed.

He came again after an hour, and came again after two hours, looked in at
the little window, saw Siddhartha standing there, in the moonlight, in the
starlight, in the darkness. He came again hour after hour, in silence,
looked into the room, saw the resolute one standing there, it filled his
heart with anger, filled his heart with anxiety, filled his heart with
doubts, filled it with sorrow.

And in the last hour of the night, before the day began, he went back
again, entered the room, saw the young man standing there. He seemed great
to him, and like a stranger.

“Siddhartha,” he said, “what is it you are waiting for?”

“You know what I am waiting for.”

“Will you persist in standing like this and waiting until day comes,
midday comes, evening comes?”

“I will stand and wait.”

“You will become tired, Siddhartha.”

“I will become tired.”

“You will fall asleep, Siddhartha.”

“I will not fall asleep.”

“You will die, Siddhartha.”

“I will die.”

“And would you rather die than do as your father tells you?”

“Siddhartha has always done as his father has told him.”

“So will you give up this idea?”

“Siddhartha will do as his father says.”

The first rays of daylight fell into the room. The brahmin saw that
Siddhartha’s knees were trembling slightly. He saw no tremble in
Siddhartha’s face, his eyes fixed on the far distance. Then his father
realised that Siddhartha was no longer with him in his native country,
that he had already left him.

His father touched Siddhartha’s shoulder.

“You will go into the woods and become a samana,” he said. “If you
find holiness in the woods come and teach me about holiness. If you find
disappointment come back and we can make sacrifices to the gods together
again. Now go and kiss your mother, tell her where you’re going. For me,
it is time now to go down to the river and start the first washing of the
day.”

He took his hand off his son’s shoulder and went out. Siddhartha
staggered to one side as he tried to walk. He forced his limbs to do as he
wanted, bowed to his father and went to his mother to do as his father had
told him.

The town, in the light of early morning, was still quiet as Siddhartha
walked out of it, moving slowly on his stiff legs. As he passed the last
hut a shadow rose from where it had been crouching and approached the
pilgrim - Govinda.

“You have come,” said Siddhartha with a smile.

“I have come,” said Govinda.


AMONG THE SAMANAS

They reached the samanas that evening, the emaciated samanas, and offered
them their company and their obedience. They were accepted.

Siddhartha had given his coat to a poor brahmin on the way there. All he
wore now were his loin cloth and an earth coloured, untailored cloak. He
ate just once a day and never had cooked food. He fasted for fifteen days.
He fasted for twenty-eight days. The flesh disappeared from his limbs and
his cheeks. Feverish dreams flickered from his bulging eyes, the nails
grew long on his desiccated fingers, a dry, unkempt beard. When he
encountered a woman his eyes became icy; his mouth twitched with contempt
when he entered a town and saw the people in their fine clothes. He saw
businessmen doing business, he saw noblemen go hunting, he saw the
bereaved grieving for their dead, whores offering their bodies, doctors
taking care of the sick, priests saying when to sow crops, lovers loving,
mothers feeding their babies - and none of this was worth a glance from
him, all was lies, everything stank, everything stank of lies, everything
made a pretence of good sense and happiness and beauty, all was in decay
and none could see it. The world tasted bitter. Life was a torment.

Siddhartha had but one objective: to empty himself, to empty himself of
thirst, of desire, of dreams, empty himself of joy and sorrow. To die away
from himself, to no longer be himself, to find peace by emptying his own
heart, to stand open to the miracle by alienating his own thoughts, that
was his objective. Once the whole of his self had been overcome and
destroyed, once every need and every drive of his heart was silent, that
was when the ultimate had to wake, the deepest part of his being, that
which is no longer the self, the great secret.

Siddhartha stood silent in the vertical glare of the Sun, aglow with pain,
aglow with thirst, and he stood there till he no longer felt pain nor
thirst. He stood silent in the time of rains with the water flowing from
his hair onto his icy cold shoulders, over his icy cold hips and legs, and
the penitent remained standing there till his shoulders and his legs no
longer felt icy cold, till they became silent, till they were at peace. He
crouched silent in the thorny bushes, blood dropping from his burning
skin, pus dropping from his wounds, and Siddhartha remained rigid,
remained motionless, till the blood no longer flowed, till the thorns no
longer pierced his skin, till nothing more burned him.

Siddhartha sat up straight and learned to control his breath, learned to
need little air, learned to stop his breath. He learned, starting with his
breath, to still the beats of his heart, learned to reduce the beats of
his heart till they became fewer and then till there were almost none.

Siddhartha was taught by the eldest of the samanas, he trained in losing
the self, he trained in contemplation, learned new samana rules. A heron
flew out of the bamboo forest - and Siddhartha took the heron into his
soul, he flew over the woods and mountains, he was a heron, he ate fish,
he hungered as a heron hungers, he spoke the heron language, he died the
death of a heron. A dead jackal lay on the sand by the water, and
Siddhartha’s soul slipped into the corpse, he was entirely a jackal, he
lay on the shore, he bloated with gas, he stank, he decayed, he was torn
apart by hyenas, he lost his skin to the vultures, he became a skeleton,
became dust, blew in the wind that crossed the meadows. And Siddhartha’s
soul came back to him, died, decayed, crumbled, it had tasted the dark
inebriation of the circle of life, again endured thirst like the hunter in
the wasteland where the circle of life might be left behind, where cause
and effect ended, where eternity without pain began. He brought death to
his senses, brought death to his memory, slipped out of his own self and
into a thousand alien forms, he was an animal, was carrion, was stone, was
wood, was water, and each time found himself ever more aware, light of sun
or moon, became again himself, swang in the circle, felt thirst, overcame
the thirst, felt the thirst anew.

Among the samanas Siddhartha learned many things, he learned many ways to
leave his self behind. He learned the way of self-alienation by pain, by
voluntary suffering and how to overcome pain, hunger, thirst, fatigue. He
travelled on the way of self-alienation by meditation, by removing from
his thoughts any sense that he was perceiving what presented itself to
him. This he learned, and he learned many other ways to travel, he left
his self behind a thousand times, he persisted in the not-self for hours,
for days. But although these ways led him away from his self they always,
at the end, led him back to it. Siddhartha fled from his self a thousand
times, spent time in nothingness, in the animal, in a stone, but he was
never able to prevent his return, the hour of his return was not
avoidable, and he would find himself, once again, in the light of the sun
or the moon, in shade or in rain, and Siddhartha and his self were there
once again, once again the suffering of the circle of life was placed upon
him.

At his side lived Govinda, his shadow, travelling the same road,
undergoing the same trials. They seldom spoke to each other, only when it
was needed for their service and their exercises. At times they would go
together to the villages in order to beg for food for themselves and their
teachers.

“What do you think, Govinda,” Siddhartha once asked him as they were
on their way to beg. “Do you think we have made any progress? Have we
reached any of our targets?”

Govinda answered, “We have learned things, and we continue to learn. You
will be a great samana, Siddhartha. You have learned every exercise very
quickly, and the old samanas have been amazed at you. One day, Siddhartha,
you will be a holy man.”

Siddhartha said, “That is not how I see it, my friend. All that I have
learned so far I could have learned much faster and much easier in any bar
where the whores are, my friend, among all the cheats and the gamblers.”

Govinda said, “That is what you say, my friend, but you know that
Siddhartha is not some cattle driver, and that a samana is not some
drunkard. The drunk can numb his senses, he can find escape and rest for a
short time, but then he comes back from his stupor and finds that all is
as it was before. He makes himself no wiser, he has gathered no knowledge
any sort, he has climbed not one step higher.”

Siddhartha smiled and said, “I don’t know, I’ve never been a
drunkard. But I do know that in all my exercises and contemplations I have
only ever found a brief respite from suffering, and remained just as far
away from wisdom and liberation as a child in its mother’s womb. I do
know that, Govinda, I do know that.”

Another time, when Siddhartha and Govinda came out of the woods together
and down to the village to beg for food for their brothers and teachers,
Siddhartha began to speak and said, “What about now, Govinda, do you
think we are on the right path? Are we getting any closer to knowledge?
Are we getting any closer to liberation? Or are we just going round in
circles - we, who are trying to escape the circle of life?”

Govinda said, “We have learnt many things, Siddhartha, and there is
still a lot more to learn. We are not going round in circles, we are
mounting higher, the circle is a spiral, we have already climbed up many
steps.”

Siddhartha answered, “How old do you think our eldest samana is, our
venerable teacher?”

Govinda said, “He must be about sixty, our eldest samana.”

And Siddhartha, “He has reached the age of sixty, and he still has not
reached Nirvana. He will be seventy, and then eighty, and you and me, we
will become old in the same way and we will do our exercises, and we will
fast, and we will meditate. But we will never reach Nirvana, he will not,
we will not. Govinda, of all the samanas that there are, I do not think
any one of them is likely to reach Nirvana. We find consolation, we find
respite from pain, we learn the skills with which we deceive ourselves.
But that which is essential, the way of ways, that is what we are not
finding.”

“Do not utter such shocking words, Siddhartha!” said Govinda. “We
are among so many learned men, so many brahmins, so many strict and
venerable samanas, so many seekers, so many who strive with such effort,
so many holy men; how could it be that none of these finds the way of
ways?”

But Siddhartha replied in a voice that was sad as much as it was mocking,
a gentle voice, a somewhat sad voice, somewhat mocking, “Soon now,
Govinda, your friend will be leaving the way of the samanas along which he
has travelled so far with you. I suffer from thirst, Govinda, and my
thirst has not become any the less on this long way of the samanas. I have
always been thirsty for knowledge, always been full of questions. I
questioned the brahmins year after year, I sought knowledge in the holy
vedas year after year, and I put questions to the pious samanas year after
year. Perhaps, Govinda, it would have been just as good, just as clever
and just as healing to go and put questions to the rhinoceros birds or the
chimpanzees. I have taken much time to learn this, Govinda, and I am still
not at the end of it, I have learned that learning is impossible! I
believe that in fact there is nothing in anything that we could call
‘learning.’ There is only a kind of knowledge that is everywhere, my
friend, and that is Atman. Atman is in me and in everything else that has
existence. And so now I am beginning to believe that this knowledge has no
worse enemy than the pursuit of knowledge, than learning.”

At this, Govinda stopped walking, raised his hands and said,
“Siddhartha, please do not make your friend anxious with talk like this!
What you are saying really does make me anxious in my heart. Think what
you are saying; where would that leave the holiness of prayer, where would
that leave the dignity of being a brahmin, where would that leave the
holiness of the samanas if it were as you say, if it were not possible
ever to learn?! Siddhartha, where would that leave anything on Earth that
is holy or valuable or venerable?!”

Govinda quietly muttered a verse, a verse from one of the Upanishads:

The purest soul that deeply thinks and sinks itself in Atman, His blessed
heart will have no words to tell it to the world.

Siddhartha, though, remained silent. He thought about the words that
Govinda had just said to him, he thought about the words to their end.

Yes, he thought as he stood there with his head lowered, what would be
left of all the things that seem holy to us? What would remain? What would
be preserved? And he shook his head.

At an earlier time, when the two young men had lived with the samanas, and
performed their exercises together for about three years, there came to
them through many ways and turnings a message, a rumour, saying; One has
appeared that will be called Gotama, the noble one, the buddha. He will
have overcome the pain of the world in himself and brought the wheel of
rebirth to a halt. With his followers he travels through the land,
teaching as he goes, without property, without a home, without a wife,
wearing the yellow garb of an ascetic but with joy on his brow, a holy
man, and brahmans and princes bow their knee to him and become his pupils.

This legend, this rumour, this folk tale sounded out, raised itself like a
scent far and wide, brahmins spoke of it in the cities, samanas spoke of
it in the woods, the name of Gotama, the buddha, was repeated over and
again in the ears of the young, in the good and in the evil, in praise and
in contempt.

As when the plague is raging through a country and a rumour arises that
somewhere there is a man, a wise man, a knowledgeable man whose word and
whose breath alone is enough to heal anyone afflicted with it, when this
rumour spreads through the land and all are talking of it, many believe
it, many doubt it, but many set themselves straight on the road to seek
out this wise man who can help them, so it was with the fragrant rumour of
Gotama, the buddha, the wise man from the line of the sakyas. He
possessed, so the believers said, the highest enlightenment, he remembered
his previous lives, he had attained nirvana and would never more come back
to the cycle of rebirth, never more submerge in the dark waters that
carried the forms of the lower world. Many things majestic and incredible
were reported of him, he had performed miracles, had overcome the Devil,
had spoken with the gods. His enemies, however, and those who did not
believe, said that this Gotama was a vain seducer, he spent his days in
comfort, despised the acts of sacrifice, was without learning and
performed neither exercise nor self-castigation.

Sweet was this legend of the buddha, magical was the aroma of these
rumours. Diseased was the world, hard to bear was life - and look, there
appeared to flow water from a new spring, a call of good news seemed to be
heard, reassuring, mild, and full of noble promises. Everywhere that the
rumour of the buddha was heard, in every part of the lands of India, the
young men listened, felt longing, felt hope, and every pilgrim or stranger
who came to the sons of brahmins in the towns and villages with news of
him, the noble one, the sakyamuni, was welcome.

This legend even penetrated into the woods where the samanas lived, even
to Siddhartha, even to Govinda, slowly, drop by drop, each drop laden with
hope, each drop laden with doubt. They seldom spoke of it, as the eldest
of the samanas was no friend of this legend. He had been taught that
anyone who seemed to be a buddha had first become an ascetic and lived in
the woods, and only then returned to the world of comfort and gaiety, and
he had no faith in this Gotama at all.

“Siddhartha,” said Govinda to his friend one day. “I was in the
village today and a brahman invited me into his house, and in his house
was a brahmin’s son from Magadha who had seen this buddha with his own
eyes and listened to his teachings. At that, the very breath in my lungs
truly caused me pain and I thought: I too would like, both of us,
Siddhartha and I, would like to experience these teachings, to learn from
the mouth of one who had attained perfection! Tell me, my friend, should
we not go and learn from the mouth of this buddha himself?”

Siddhartha answered, “Oh, Govinda, I had always thought Govinda would
stay with the samanas, it was always my belief that it was his objective
to live to the age of sixty or seventy and always practise the arts and
exercises that the samanas display. But look at me now, I did not know
Govinda well enough, I knew little of his heart. But now, dear friend, now
you want to set out on a new path and go there, where the buddha spreads
his teachings.”

Govinda answered, “You like to laugh at me. I hope you always keep
laughing, Siddhartha! But do you not also feel the desire to hear these
teachings rising within you, the wish to hear what is said? And did you
not once say to me that you would not stay for long among the samanas to
follow their way?”

At this Siddhartha laughed, in his way of laughing that took on a shadow
of sorrow and a shadow of mockery, and said, “Quite right, Govinda, what
you say is quite right, you have remembered it rightly. But maybe you
should also remember something else you heard from me, that I had become
tired and mistrustful of teachings and learning, and that my beliefs have
little faith in the words that come to us from teachers. But anyway, my
friend, I am willing to come and hear these teachings - even though, in my
heart, I think we have already tasted the best fruits of them.”

Govinda answered, “Your readiness brings joy to my heart. But tell me,
how can that be possible? How could the teachings of Gotama have given us
their best fruits even before we have tasted them?”

Siddhartha answered, “Let us enjoy these fruits and wait to see what
happens, Govinda! But we can already be thankful to Gotama in that his
fruits are calling us away from the samanas! Perhaps he has other fruit to
offer, and better fruit my friend. Let us keep peace in our hearts and
wait to see if this is so.”

That very day Siddhartha told the eldest of the samanas of his decision to
leave him. He told him with all the humility and modesty as befits a
junior and a pupil. The samana, however fell into a rage at the young
men’s decision to leave, he raised his voice and used foul language.

Govinda was shocked and embarrassed, but Siddhartha put his mouth to
Govinda’s ear and whispered, “Now I will show the elder that I have
learned something from him.”

Siddhartha stood close in front of the samana, gathered his own spirit,
captured the gaze of the old man with his own gaze, and thereby did he
enthrall him, made him dumb, deprived him of his will, subjected him to
his own will, and without a word he ordered him to do as he commanded. The
old man was unable to speak, unable to move his eyes, unable to direct his
own will, his arms hung loose, he became powerless and was subject to the
magic worked by Siddhartha. Siddhartha’s thoughts overpowered those of
the samana, he had to carry out whatever commands they gave him. And so
the old man bowed down several times, performed gestures of blessing and
humbly stammered out wishes for a good journey. And the young men replied
by thanking him for his prostrations, thanked him for his good wishes and
with those greetings made their departure.

On the way Govinda said, “Oh Siddhartha, you learned more from the
samanas than I had realised. It is not easy, not easy at all, to bewitch
an ancient samana. I am sure that if you had stayed with them you would
soon have learned to walk on water.”

“Why would I want to walk on water?” said Siddhartha. “If the
ancient samanas want to do tricks like that they can keep them!”


GOTAMA

In the city of Savathi every child knew the name of the noble buddha, and
every house was ready to fill the begging bowls of Gotama’s disciples
when they made their silent requests. Near the city was the grove of
Jetavana. This wood had been given to Gotama and his followers by
Anathapindika, a rich businessman who was devoted to the noble one, and it
was the place that Gotama liked to visit most.

All the stories and all the answers that the two young ascetics had heard
in their search for Gotama had directed them to this place. When they
arrived in Savathi they stood at the door of the first house silently
begging for food, which was given them. Siddhartha asked the woman who had
offered them the food:

“Generous lady, we would like to learn where the most venerable one, the
buddha, spends his time, for we are two samanas from the woods and have
come to see him, the perfect one, and to hear the teachings from his
mouth.”

The woman said, “You have certainly arrived at the right place, samanas
from the woods. You should know that Jetavana, the garden of
Anathapindikas, is where the noble one spends his time. You will be able
to spend the night there, pilgrims, as there is even enough room there for
the countless many who flood to this place to hear the teachings from his
mouth.”

This was pleasing news to Govinda, and full of joy he declared, “That is
good, so we have reached our destination and our journey is at its end!
But tell us, mother of pilgrims, do you know him, the buddha, have you
seen him with your own eyes?”

The woman said, “Many have seen him, the noble one. Many times I have
seen him as he went on his way through the streets and alleys, silent in
his yellow robes, silent as he showed his begging bowl at the doors of
houses and, as he left those places, his begging bowl full.”

Govinda listened with joy and wanted to put many questions and to hear
more. But Siddhartha urged that they should go on their way. They said
thank you and left, and had hardly any need to ask the way for many
pilgrims were on their way to Jetavana, as well as monks from Gotama’s
community. They arrived there in the night time, there was a continuous
flow of visitors arriving, calling to each other, talking about who was
looking for shelter and who had found it. The two samanas, used to life in
the woods, found a place to rest quickly and quietly and remained there
till morning.

When the sun rose they were astonished to see the size of the crowd,
believers or the curious, who had spent the night here. Monks in their
yellow robes wandered along all the paths of the beautiful grove, here and
there under the trees sat people deep in meditation or engaged in
spiritual discussion. The shady garden was like a city, full of people
swarming like bees. Most of the monks were leaving with their begging
bowls in order to collect food for midday, when they would have their only
meal of the day. Even the buddha himself, the enlightened one, made a
habit of going out to beg each morning.

Siddhartha saw him, and as quickly as if he had been pointed out by a god,
he knew who it was. He saw him, a slight man in a yellow cloak, making his
quiet way with his begging bowl in his hand.

“Govinda, look!” whispered Siddhartha. “Just there, that is the
buddha.”

Govinda stared at the monk in the yellow robe, indistinguishable from the
hundreds of other monks there. And soon Govinda could see it too: it was
him. And they followed him and kept him in their sight.

The buddha followed his path with humility and deep in thought, the
peaceful expression on his face was neither gay nor sad, it seemed to show
a gentle inward contentment. With a hidden smile, quiet, peaceful, not
unlike a healthy child, the buddha wandered on, wearing his robes and
placing his feet in the same way as all his monks, in the way that was
prescribed. But his face, his gait, his quiet lowered eyes, his hands
hanging quietly from his arms, and even every finger on his quietly
hanging hands spoke of peace, spoke of perfection, sought nothing, copied
nothing, breathed gently with a peace that could not fade, in a light that
could not fade, a peace that could not be touched.

So, Gotama walked on slowly towards the town where he would gather alms,
and the two samanas knew him simply from the perfection of his peace, the
stillness of his form where no searching, no desire, no imitation, no
striving could be seen, only light and peace.

“Today, we will hear the teachings from his own mouth,” said Govinda.

Siddhartha made no answer. He had less curiosity about the teachings, he
did not believe they would teach him anything new, even though, like
Govinda, he had heard many times about what the teachings of this buddha
contained, albeit from the reports he had heard at second or third hand.
But he looked attentively at Gotama’s head, at his shoulders, at his
feet, at his hand as it hung there without moving, and it seemed to him
that every part of every finger of that hand held a lesson, spoke,
breathed, was fragrant and shone with truth. This man, this buddha, was
truthful down to every movement of every finger. This man was holy.
Siddhartha had never felt such veneration for anyone, he had never loved
anyone as much as this man.

The two of them followed the buddha into the town and then they quietly
turned back, as they too hoped to obtain food for themselves before the
end of day. They saw Gotama as he too came back, saw him surrounded by his
followers as they took their meal - what he ate was not enough to feed a
bird - and they saw him withdraw into the shade of the mango trees.

But when evening came, when the heat of the day had lessened and everyone
in the camp became more active and gathered together, they heard the
buddha speak. They heard his voice, and even that was a thing of
perfection, of perfect stillness, of complete peace. Gotama taught the
lesson of suffering, of the origin of suffering, of the way that leads to
the removal of suffering. His speech flowed on, calm, peaceful and clear,
it was. Life was sorrow, the world was full of suffering, but release from
suffering could be found: release would be found by him who followed the
way of the buddha. The noble one spoke in a voice that was gentle but
firm, he taught of the four principal doctrines, he taught of the
eight-fold path, the circle of reincarnation, his voice, clear and quiet,
remained above his listeners like a light, like a star in the firmament.

Night had fallen before the buddha came to the end of his speech. Many
pilgrims came forward and asked to be accepted into his community, sought
refuge in the teachings. Gotama did accept them, with the words, “You
have ingested the teachings well, they were conveyed to you well. Come,
then, among us and walk in holiness, that you may prepare an end to all
sorrow.”

Then Govinda, too, the shy one, was seen to come forward and he said,
“I, too, seek refuge with the noble one and his teachings,” and asked
to be accepted among the buddha’s followers, and he was accepted.

Soon thereafter, as the buddha had withdrawn for his night’s rest,
Govinda went to Siddhartha with great enthusiasm and said, “I am not
entitled to reproach you for anything. We have both heard the noble one,
we have both received his teachings. Govinda heard the teaching, he has
taken refuge in them. But you, revered one, will you not take the path of
liberation? Will you delay, will you continue to wait?”

When he realised what Govinda had said Siddhartha woke as if he had been
sleeping. Then, gently and with no mockery in his voice, he said,
“Govinda, my friend, now you have taken the first step, now you have
chosen your path. You have always been my friend, Govinda, you have always
followed me one step behind. I have often asked myself whether Govinda
would one day take a step of his own, without me, from his own soul. Now
see, you have become a man and chosen your own way. I hope you will follow
it to its end, my friend! I hope you will find liberation!”

Govinda still did not fully understand, and impatiently repeated his
question: “Speak, dear friend, I beg of you, speak! Tell me what cannot
be different, tell me my learned friend that you too will take refuge with
the noble buddha!”

Siddhartha lay his hand on Govinda’s shoulder. “You have failed to
hear my deepest wish for you, Govinda. I will repeat if for you: I hope
you will follow your path to its end, my friend! I hope you will find
liberation!”

At that moment Govinda saw that his friend had left him, and he began to
weep.

“Siddhartha!” he implored.

Siddhartha’s reply was friendly. “Govinda, do not forget that you now
are one of the samanas of the buddha. You have forsaken your home and your
parents, forsaken origins and possessions, by your own free will you have
forsaken friendship. This is what is said in the teachings, this is what
is said by the buddha. This is what you have chosen for yourself.
Tomorrow, Govinda, I will leave you.”

The two friends wandered long among the trees, long they lay but found no
sleep. And Govinda asked his friend over and over again why he would not
take refuge in the teachings of Gotama, what fault could he find in these
teachings. But Siddharth always rejected his insistence and said, “Learn
to be in peace, Govinda. The teachings of the noble one are very good. How
should I find any fault in them?”

As morning was breaking one of the buddha’s followers, one of his eldest
monks, went through the garden and summoned all them who had newly chosen
to take refuge in the teachings. They were to put on their yellow robes
and receive their first instruction in the teachings and duties of their
new status. Govinda ran to Siddhartha, embraced his childhood friend on
more time, and went to join the ranks of the novices.

Siddhartha, however, wandered among the trees, deep in thought.

While he was there he came across Gotama, the noble one. Siddhartha
greeted him with veneration. There was so much peace and goodness to be
seen in the buddha’s eyes that the young man took courage and asked the
venerable one’s permission to speak to him. The noble one gave his
assent with a silent nod.

Siddhartha said, “Noble one, I was yesterday privileged to hear your
wonderful teachings. I had come here from afar with a friend to hear them.
My friend now will stay among your followers and take refuge with you. I,
however, will start my pilgrimage anew.”

“You are free to do as you wish,” said the noble one politely.

“In speaking to you I have been more bold than I should have been,”
Siddhartha continued, “but I would not want to depart from the noble one
without having given him my sincere thoughts. Would the noble one be
willing to give me another moment of his time to hear me?”

The buddha gave his assent with a silent nod.

Siddhartha said, “There is something, most venerable one, that I admired
most of all in what you said. Everything in your teachings is perfectly
clear and supported with proof; you depict the world as a perfect chain,
never broken anywhere on its length, an eternal chain made up of causes
and effects. This has never been made so clear, never set out so
irrefutably; the heart of every brahman must surely beat at a higher level
when he has heard your teachings and first sees the world of perfect
coherence, without omissions, as clear as crystal, not dependent on
chance, not dependent on any gods. This could be good or bad, could bring
joy or sorrow to life, but it is not something we need to consider, it
could well be that it is not of basic importance - but the unity of the
world, that all events are inter-related, the flow of existence that
embraces all things great and small, the law of cause and effect,
existence and death, all these things shine brightly out from your noble
teachings, o perfect one. But there is a place in your own teachings where
this cohesion, this sound argument that governs all things is interrupted,
there is a small hole where something strange, something new, something
not previously there flows into this world, it is something that cannot be
shown, cannot be proved: this is your teaching about not being overcome by
the world, your teaching about liberation. With this tiny hole, with this
tiny intrusion the entire coherent and eternal world-order is once again
broken down and cannot be maintained. I hope you will forgive me for
voicing this objection.”

Gotama had listened to him still and unmoving. Now, with his benevolent
voice, with his clear and polite voice, the perfect one spoke: “You have
listened to the teachings, brahmin’s son, and it is good that you have
thought so deeply about them. You have found a gap in them, a mistake. I
hope you will continue to think about the teachings, you have a thirst for
knowledge, but you should be warned of the thickets of beliefs and of
quibbles around words. Beliefs are not important, they can be beautiful or
ugly, clever or foolish, anyone can stay attached to them or throw them
away. But the teachings that you heard from me are not beliefs and I was
not trying to explain the world to them who have a thirst for knowledge. I
was attempting something quite different, I was attempting to show how to
gain liberation from suffering. This is what Gotama teaches, nothing
else.”

“I hope you will not be cross with me, noble one,” the young man said.
“I have no wish to argue with you but to argue about words, this is why
I have spoken to you in this way. You are certainly quite right, beliefs
alone are not of great importance. But allow me to say one thing more: I
have never for a moment had any doubts about you. I have never for a
moment doubted that you are a buddha, that you have reached the end of
your path, the highest objective that so many thousands of brahmins and
brahmins’ sons pursue. You have found liberation from death. You have
attained this by your own searching, by travelling your own path, by
thought, by meditation, by knowledge, by enlightenment. You have not
attained it by listening to the teachings of others! And - this is what I
have come to believe, noble one - nobody can ever attain liberation by
listening to the teachings of others! Nobody, venerable one, will come to
understand what happened to you in the hour of your enlightenment by
hearing your words and your teachings! The enlightened one, the buddha,
teaches many things about how to live a good and honest life and how to
avoid evil, but the teaching that is so clear, that is so noble, is not
there: the noble one does not give teaching about the secret that he alone
has experienced, he alone out of hundreds of thousands. This is what I
thought, what I perceived, when I heard your teachings. This is the reason
I will continue in my wanderings - not to find other teachings which may
be better, for I know there are none, but to abandon all teachings and all
teachers and either to attain my goal alone or to die. But, noble one, I
will often think back to this day and this hour, for my eyes have seen a
man of great holiness.”

The buddha looked quietly down at the ground, the buddha’s face,
peaceful but inscrutable, shone with perfect serenity.

“I hope your thoughts,” the venerable one said slowly, “are not
mistaken! May you arrive at your objective! But tell me: have you seen how
many samanas I have, how many brothers who have taken refuge in my
teachings? And do you think, samana from a foreign place, do you think all
of these would be better off if they abandoned the teachings and went back
to life in the world with all its enjoyments?”

“Such a thought is far from me,” Siddhartha exclaimed. “I hope they
will all remain with the teachings, I hope they will reach their goal! It
is not up to me to judge how others lead their lives. I can only judge my
own life, I must choose for myself, must reject for myself. We samanas
seek liberation from our selves, noble one. I fear, venerable one, that if
I were one of your followers I might only seem to bring my self to peace,
that my liberation would be illusory and my self would in fact continue to
exist and grow bigger, as then I would have the teachings, would have my
followers, would have my love for you, would have the community of monks
and all this I would have made into my self!”

With a half-smile, with unshakeable clarity and friendliness, Gotama
looked the stranger in the eye and took his leave of him with barely
noticeable gesture.

“You are clever, samana,” the venerable one said. “Your arguments,
my friend, are very clever. Take care that you do not become too
clever!”

The buddha walked slowly away, and his look and his half smile remained
forever engraved in Siddhartha’s memory.

I have never before seen anyone look and smile, sit and walk, like this
man, he thought to himself. I truly hope that I, too, will be able to look
and to smile, to sit and to walk as he does, so free, so venerable, so
hidden, so open, so child-like and private. It is only the man who has
penetrated to his innermost self who is truly able to look and to walk in
this way. I, too, will do my utmost to penetrate to my innermost self.

I have seen one man, Siddhartha thought, just one, to whom I had to lower
my eyes. I will not lower my eyes to any other man, not anyone. I will not
be drawn into any teachings, as I was not drawn into the teachings of this
man.

I was robbed by this buddha, Siddhartha thought, he robbed me, but he gave
me much more. He robbed me of my friend, of him who had faith in me and
now has faith in him, of him who was my shadow and is now the shadow of
Gotama. But he made the gift to me, to Siddhartha, of myself.


AWAKENING

As Siddhartha left the grove where the buddha, the perfect one, remained
behind, where Govinda remained behind, he felt that he was also leaving
behind his life so far, that it was separating itself from him. This
sensation filled him completely, and he thought about it as he slowly
walked on. He pondered deeply as if sinking through deep water, he allowed
himself to drop to the bottom of this feeling to the place where its
causes lay, as it seemed to him that identifying causes was to think, and
that is the only way to make sensations into knowledge and avoid losing
them altogether, the only way to make them substantial, the only way to
make them shine and show what they contain.

He pondered as he walked slowly on. He concluded that he was no longer a
youth but had become a man. He concluded that something had left him like
a snake that sloughs its skin, that something within him was no longer
there for him, something that had been with him all through his youth and
had belonged to him: the wish to have a teacher and to hear teachings. He
had even departed from last teacher who had come to him on his way, the
highest and wisest of teachers, the holiest of them all, the buddha, he
had had to separate himself from him, he had been unable to accept his
teachings.

Siddhartha continued to ponder as he walked, and his movement became
slower as he asked himself: But what was it that you wanted to learn from
the teachers? What was it that those teachers who spent so much time
giving you their lessons were nonetheless unable to teach you? And
Siddhartha found an answer: What I wanted to learn was my self, I wanted
to learn the meaning and the essence of my self. I wanted to be rid of my
self, wanted to overcome my self. But I was not able to overcome it, was
able only to cheat it, was able only to flee from it, to hide from it.
There is truly nothing in the world that has occupied my thoughts as much
as this self of mine, this puzzle that I am alive, that I am separate from
one and all, severed from them, that I am Siddhartha! And there is nothing
in the world that I know less about than myself, about Siddhartha!

Siddhartha walked more slowly as he pondered and then, gripped by these
thoughts, came to a stop. And at that moment a new thought sprang out from
them: There is a reason why I know nothing about myself, a cause for
Siddhartha remaining so strange and unfamiliar to me, just one cause; I
was in fear of myself, I was in flight from myself! I sought Atman, I
sought Brahman, I had resolved to break my self apart, to flay it apart so
that in its innermost, least known part I could find the kernel within all
shells, Atman, life, the divine, the ultimate. But in the process I lost
myself.

Siddhartha suddenly opened his eyes and looked around him, a smile covered
his face, and a profound sense of waking from a long period of dreams
flowed through him all the way down to his toes. And as soon as he began
to walk on he walked quickly, like a man who knows what he has to do.

He took in a deep breath and thought to himself: “I will not let
Siddhartha get away from me now! I will no longer let my thoughts and my
life begin with Atman and the suffering of the world. I will no longer
kill myself and dismember myself in order to see behind the ruins and find
a secret there. I will no longer take teachings from yoga-veda, nor from
atharva-veda, nor the ascetics nor any other kind of teaching. I will
learn by myself alone, be a student of myself, learn to know myself, the
secret of Siddhartha.”

He looked around him as if seeing the world for the first time. The world
was beautiful, filled with many colours, strange and puzzling was the
world! Blue here, yellow here, green here, sky and river flowed, trees and
hills reached upwards, everything beautiful, everything puzzling and
magic, and in the middle of it all was he, Siddhartha, the awakening one,
on the way to himself. All this, all this yellow and blue, river and wood,
entered into Siddhartha through his eyes for the first time, it was no
longer the sorcery of Mara, no longer the veil of maya, no longer the
meaningless and random diversity of the world of delusion that the deep
thinking brahmin despises, that the deep thinking brahmin scorns in his
search for unity. Blue was blue, river was river, this was where the
divine lived hidden, the blueness and the river lay within Siddhartha but
this was how the divine showed itself and it was nonetheless one; yellow
here, blue here, the sky there, the woods there, and here to be
Siddhartha. Meaning and essence were not somewhere behind things, they
were within them, in everything.

“I have been so deaf, so dull-witted!” he thought as he hurried
forward. “When a man reads scripture in pursuit of its meaning he does
not despise the ciphers and letters, calling them deceitful, random or
meaningless shells, he reads it, he studies it and loves it, letter by
letter. But I, who wanted to read the book of the world and the book of my
own essence, I did despise the ciphers and letters for the sake of a
meaning I thought I knew beforehand, when I saw the world, when I touched
the world, I called it delusion, I called my eye and my tongue random and
worthless appearances. No, this is in the past now, I have awoken, I have
truly awoken and today I am born for the first time.”

As Siddhartha had this thought he suddenly stopped walking again, as if
there lay a snake in front of him on the path, he also awoke to this
insight: I am not now that which I once was, I am no longer an ascetic, I
am no longer a priest, I am no longer a brahmin. So what should I do at
home in the house of my father? Study? Perform sacrifices? Cultivate
meditation? All this lies now in the past, all this is no longer on my
path.

For suddenly there was something else that had become clear to him: He,
who had in fact become like one awoken or newly born, he would have to
start his life anew and from its very beginning. That very morning, as he
left the grove of Jetavana, the grove of the noble one, already awaking,
already on the way to himself, it was his intention, an intention that
seemed to be natural and a matter of course, that he would bring his years
of living as an ascetic to an end and return home to his father. But now,
only now at this moment when he stopped walking as if a snake lay on the
path in front of him, he awoke also to this insight: I am no longer the
person I once was, I am no longer an ascetic, I am no longer a priest, I
am no longer a brahmin. So what should I do if I go back home to my
father? Study? Perform sacrifices? Cultivate meditation? These things are
all in the past, these things no longer lie before me on my way.

Siddhartha stood there motionless, and for one moment, for one intake of
breath, his heart remained frozen, he felt it freezing in his breast
inside him like a small animal, a bird or a hare, as he saw how alone he
was. For many years he had been without a home and had not felt it. Now he
did feel it. Until now, even when immersed in the deepest meditation, he
had been his father’s son, a brahmin, a man of high status, a spiritual
man. Now he was merely Siddhartha, the awoken one, nothing more. He drew
in a deep breath, and for a moment he froze and shuddered. No-one was as
alone as he was. No nobleman who did not belong among noblemen, no
handworker who did not belong among handworkers but found refuge among
them, sharing his life with theirs and speaking their language. No brahmin
who did not count as a brahmin and lived among them, no ascetic who found
no refuge in his status as a samana, and not even the hermit lost deepest
in the woods was single or alone, even he was surrounded by the things he
belonged to, even he belonged to a certain condition that made that place
his home. Govinda had become a monk and had a thousand monks as his
brothers, he wore his robes, believed his beliefs and spoke his language.
But he, Siddhartha, where did he belong? Whose life would he share? Whose
language would he speak?

From this moment on, when the world around him was melting away, when he
stood alone like a star in the sky, from this moment of coldness and
despair, Siddhartha always rose up more his self than he had been, more
concentrated than he had been. He felt: This was the final spasm of
awakening, the last cramp of his birth. And he immediately stepped out
again, began to walk quickly and impatiently, no longer going home, no
longer going to his father, no longer going back.



PART TWO

Dedicated to Wilhem Gundert, my cousin in Japan.


KAMALA

As Siddhartha went on his way the world was transformed and his heart was
enchanted, and with every step he learnt something new. He saw the sun
rise above the trees on the mountains and saw it set behind distant palmy
beaches. At night he saw the stars ranged across the sky and the crescent
moon like a boat swimming in a sea of blue. He saw trees, stars, animals,
clouds, rainbows, crags, herbs, flowers, streams and rivers as they
flowed, morning dew that glistened in the bushes, lofty mountains blue and
pale in the distance, birds and bees both gave their song, the wind blew,
soughing in the silver fields of rice. All of this, bright with colour
everywhere, had always been there, the sun and moon had always shone,
rivers rushed and bees did buzz, but for Siddhartha until then all of this
had been nothing but a fleeting and delusory veil before his eyes,
something to be mistrusted, something to be pierced and destroyed by the
intellect, for it was something that did not exist, for existence lay
beyond that which could be seen. But now his eye was free, it lingered on
this side of what could be seen, it looked and it acknowledged what could
be seen, it sought its home in this world, no longer sought the essence,
did not strive for the beyond. Seen in this way, without searching, so
simple, so child-like, the world was beautiful. The moon and stars were
beautiful, rivers and shores were beautiful, woods and crags, goats and
beetles, flowers and butterflies. Beautiful and lovely it was, so to go
through the world, so child-like, so awake, so open to the things around
him, so without mistrust. The sun burnt on his head differently, the shade
of the woods cooled him differently, the streams and ponds tasted
differently, marrow and banana tasted differently. The days were short,
the nights were short, every hour flew swift away like a sailboat on the
water, the sailboat full of treasure, full of joy. Siddhartha saw a troop
of monkeys travelling in the branches of the forest canopy, he heard their
wild and greedy song. Siddhartha saw a ram pursue the ewe and mating with
her. In a lake of reeds he saw the pike pursue his prey to still his
evening hunger, the school of young fish who, in fear, rushed anxiously,
flapping and flashing above the water, strength and passion forced their
scent from the rapid-swirling water, from the fierce tumult worked up by
their pursuer.

All these things had always been, and he had not seen them; he had not
been with them. Now he was with them, he belonged to them. Light and shade
ran through his eyes, through his heart ran star and moon.

On his way Siddhartha also thought about all the things he had experienced
in the garden of Jetavana, the teachings he had heard there, the divine
buddha, the farewell from Govinda, his conversation with the noble one. He
thought again about the words that he had himself said to the noble one,
remembered every word, and was astonished to suddenly realise that he had
said things he had not known till then. What he had said to Gotama: his
own, the buddha’s, treasures and secrets, these were not the teachings,
the ineffable was the teaching, something that could not be taught, what
he experienced at the moment of his enlightenment - yes, this was the
thing that he was now striving for, what he was only now beginning to
experience. The thing that he had to experience now for himself. He had
probably long known that he was his own Atman, the same eternal essence as
Brahman. But it was something he had never really found for himself
because he had tried to capture it with the web of thought. The body too,
could certainly not be the thing he sought, nor playing games with
thinking, not thought, not understanding, not the wisdom that has been
learned, not the art that has been learned that allows you to draw
conclusions and spin new thoughts from the ones already spun. No, even
this world of thoughts was still on this side and it led nowhere to kill
the random self of the senses, only to cram the random self full of
thoughts and doctrines. Both of them, thoughts and senses, were very
beautiful but both of them hid the ultimate sense, both of them were worth
listening to, worth playing with, neither should be either despised or
over-valued, both of them offered to let you hear the secret voice of the
innermost. There was nothing he strove for other than what the voice told
him to strive for, nothing he would dwell on other than where the voice
told him to dwell. Why had Gotama sat under the bo tree at that moment of
moments where enlightenment came upon him? He had heard a voice, a voice
in his own heart which told him to seek rest under this tree, he had not
chosen rather to mortify his flesh, to perform sacrifice, ablution nor
prayer, he had not sought food nor drink nor sleep nor dreams, he had done
as the voice told him. This obedience was the one thing needed, not any
command from outside himself, just the voice, to be ready, that was good,
that was needed, nothing else was needed.

In the night, while he slept by the river in the ferry man’s straw hut,
Siddhartha had a dream: Govinda stood before him in the yellow robes of
the ascetic. Govinda looked sad, and sadly he asked, “Why have you
abandoned me?” At this Siddhartha embraced Govinda, threw his arms
around him, and as he drew him to his breast and kissed him it was Govinda
no longer, it was a woman, and from the woman’s robe welled out her full
breast at which Siddhartha put his mouth and drank, sweet and strong was
the taste of the milk from this breast. It tasted of woman and man, of
sunshine and forest, of beast and flower, of every fruit, of every joy. It
made him drunk and unaware of himself. When Siddhartha woke, the pale
river shimmered with light that came in through the door of the hut, and
from the forest came the deep, dark, distinct call of an owl.

At the start of day Siddhartha asked his host, the ferry man, to take him
across the river. The ferry man put him on his bamboo raft and took him
across the river as the red light of morning shimmered on the expanse of
water.

“This is a beautiful river,” he said to his companion.

“Yes,” said the ferry man, “it is a very beautiful river, I love it
above all else. I have many times listened to what it has to say, many
times looked into its eyes, and it has always had something to teach me.
There is a great deal that you can learn from a river.”

“Thank you for your help,” said Siddhartha as he stepped onto the
other shore. “I have nothing I could give you for your hospitality, my
friend, nothing I could pay you. I have no home to live in, I am the son
of a brahmin and a samana.”

“That was easy to see,” said the ferry man, “and I never did expect
any payment from you, no gift for my hospitality. You can give me
something another time.”

“You think so?” said Siddhartha with a laugh.

“Certainly. That too is something I have learnt from the river:
everything comes back again! Even you, samana, you will be back again. So,
farewell! My fee can be your friendship. Think of me always when you make
sacrifice to the gods.”

Smiling, they took their leave of each other. Smiling, Siddhartha was glad
of the friendship and the friendliness of the ferry man. “He is so like
Govinda,” he smiling thought, “everyone I come across on my ways is
like Govinda. Everyone gives me thanks, although it is they who have the
right to receive thanks from me. Everyone is humble, everyone wishes to be
my friend, everyone wishes to obey me and to think little. People are like
children.”

Around midday he was walking through a village. In the street and in front
of its mud huts there were children running about, playing with marrow
seeds and mussels, they shouted and played rough games with each other,
but when this strange samana appeared they became timid and ran away. As
it left the village the path led across a stream and there was a young
woman kneeling at the bank of the stream washing clothes. As Siddhartha
greeted her she raised her head and looked up at him with a smile so that
he could see the sparkling whiteness of her eyes. He declared a blessing
on her, as is usual among travellers, and asked her how far it still was
till he would reach the big city. At that, she stood up and went up to
him, her face looked young and the light sparkled appealingly on her moist
lips. She exchanged a few jokey words with him, asked if he was hungry,
and whether it was true that samanas sleep alone in the woods and are not
allowed to have any women with them. As she said this she placed her left
foot on his right foot and made the kind of movement a woman makes when
she is leading a man into that sort of amorous pleasure which the books
call “climbing a tree.” Siddhartha felt his blood become warm, and as
his dream came back into his mind at that moment he leant down slightly
towards the woman and, with his lips, he kissed the brown tip of her
breast. When he looked up he saw the smile on her face, full of desire,
and that her narrowed eyes yearned for him.

Siddhartha also felt desire and felt the source of his gender as it began
to move; but he had never touched a woman until then and he hesitated a
moment before his hands were ready to reach out for her. And in that
moment he shivered as he heard a voice from deep within him, and the voice
said no. Then all the charm faded from the young woman’s smiling face,
all he saw was the damp gaze of a woman impelled by lust like an animal.
He remained friendly, stroked her cheek, turned away from her and
disappeared nimbly into the bamboo forest, leaving her disappointed.

Before the day had passed into evening, Siddhartha reached a big city, and
he looked forward to having human company. He had lived long in the
forests, the straw hut of the ferry man where he had slept the previous
night was the first time he had slept under any roof for a long time.

Before he entered the town, near a pleasant wood enclosed within a fence,
the wanderer met with a group of servants laden with baskets. In the
middle of them was their mistress on a decorated palanquin borne by four
men, she was seated on red cushions and protected from the sun under a
brightly coloured roof. Siddhartha remained at the entrance to the wooded
pleasure garden and watched the procession as it passed, saw the servants,
the maids, the baskets, the palanquin, and on the palanquin saw the lady.
Under a high tower of black hair he saw a face that was very fair, very
tender and very wise, he saw a mouth that was pink like a freshly opened
fig, eyebrows that were carefully tended and painted into tall arches,
eyes that were intelligent and dark, a tall, a fair neck that rose up from
the green and golden clothing around it, fair hands that lay at rest, long
and slender with wide gold rings over the joints.

Siddhartha saw how beautiful she was, and his heart laughed. He bowed
deeply as the palanquin came near, and as he righted himself he looked
into that fair and noble face, into the intelligent eyes with their arched
brows, he breathed in a fragrance he did not know. The beautiful woman
smiled and briefly nodded to him before she disappeared into the wood,
followed by her servers.

That is a good portent for the city I am now entering, thought Siddhartha.
He felt the urge to go into the wood but then thought better of it, and
only then did he become aware of how the servers and maids at the entrance
had looked at him, with what contempt, with what mistrust, with what
dismissal.

I am still a samana, he thought, still an ascetic and a beggar. I will
not, as such, be allowed to stay, not be allowed into the wood. And he
laughed.

As soon as he met someone on the road he asked about the wood and what the
name of that woman was. He learned that it was the grove of Kamala, the
famous courtesan, and that she owned a house in the city as well as the
wood.

Siddhartha then made his way into the city. Now he knew where he should
go.

In order to arrive there he allowed the city to drink him in, followed the
crowds in the streets, stood still in the city squares, rested on the
stone steps beside the river. As evening fell he made friends with a
barber’s assistant whom he had seen at work in the shade of a dome. He
came across him later that day as he prayed in a temple of Vishnu, and
told him the stories about Vishnu and Lakshmi. He slept that night among
the boats on the river and then, early in the morning, before the first
customers arrived in his shop, he had the barber’s assistant shave him,
cut his hair, comb his hair and dress it with fine oil. Then he went down
to bathe in the river.

Late that afternoon when the beautiful Kamala was approaching her grove on
her palanquin she found Siddhartha waiting at the entrance. He bowed to
her and accepted her greeting to him. When the train of servants had
nearly passed him he caught the attention of the last of them and asked
him to inform his mistress that there was a young brahmin who wished to
speak with her. Siddhartha waited, after a while the servant came back,
invited him to follow him, led him in silence into a pavilion where Kamala
lay on a couch and left him alone with her.

“Was it not you who stood outside there yesterday and offered me
greeting? Kamala asked.

“Indeed, I did see you yesterday and offer you greeting.”

“But did you not have a beard yesterday, and long hair and dust in your
hair?”

“You observed well, you saw everything. You saw Siddhartha, the
brahmin’s son who left his home to become a samana and spent three years
as a samana. Now, though, I have left that path and come to this city, and
you were the first to greet me her, even before I had set foot in it. I
can say that it is to you that I have come, o Kamala! You are the first
woman with whom Siddhartha has spoken without his eyes lowered. I will
never again lower my eyes when I meet with a beautiful woman.”

Kamala smiled and played with her fan of peacock feathers. And she asked,
“And has Siddhartha come to me just to say this?”

“To say this and to give you my thanks for your beauty. And if it will
not displease you, Kamala, I should like to ask you to be my friend and my
teacher, for I still know nothing of the arts in which you are so
expert.”

At this Kamala laughed out loud.

“This has never happened to me before, my friend, a samana comes to me
out of the woods and wants to learn from me! It has never happened to me
that a long-haired samana in a ragged loin cloth has come to me! There are
many young men who do come to me, some of them are even the sons of
brahmins, but they come wearing beautiful clothes and expensive shoes,
they have perfumed hair and a purse full of money. That is what the young
men look like who come to me, samana.”

Siddhartha said, “I am only beginning to learn from you. But I already
learned from you yesterday. I have had my beard nicely removed, I have
combed my hair and have oil in it. The things I lack are the things least
important, most excellent lady: fine clothes, fine shoes, money in a
purse. Do be aware that Siddhartha has undertaken much harder tasks than
trifles like that, and has achieved them. Why should I not now achieve the
task I undertook yesterday? To be your friend and to learn the pleasures
of love from you! You will see what a good student I am, Kamala, I have
learned many thing that are harder than what you have to teach me. Do you
say, then, that Siddhartha is not good enough for you as he is, with oil
in his hair but without clothes, without shoes, without money?”

Kamala laughed out loud and said, “No, worthy young man, he is not good
enough! Not yet! He must have clothes, beautiful clothes, shoes must he
have, fine shoes, he must have plentiful money in his purse, and he must
bring presents for Kamala. Do you understand now, samana from the woods?
Do you see?”

“I see it well,” Siddhartha exclaimed. “How could I have failed to
see what has just come from a mouth such as this? Your mouth is like a fig
freshly broken open, Kamala. My mouth, too, is red and fresh, it will suit
your mouth well, you will see. But, beautiful Kamala, are you not at all
afraid of this samana from the woods who has come to you to learn the arts
of love?”

“Why should I be afraid of a samana, a stupid samana, come from the
woods where the jackals live and who still has no idea of what women
are?”

“The samana is strong, though. He fears nothing. He would be able to
force you, handsome girl. He could rob you. He could hurt you.”

“No, samana, I’m not afraid of that. Has a samana or a brahmin ever
been afraid that someone might come and attack him and rob him of his
learning, his piety or his deep understanding? No, for those things belong
to him alone, and he gives them to others only when he wants to give and
to whom he wants to give. It is just the same for Kamala and the joys of
love. Kamala’s mouth is red and lovely, but if you try to kiss it
against Kamala’s will you will have not a drop of sweetness from it,
even though it knows how to give so much sweetness. Siddhartha, you want
to learn, so here is something for you to learn: You can beg for love, buy
love, receive love as a gift, you can find it on the street, but you
cannot steal love. This way that you have invented for yourself is wrong.
No, and it would be such a pity if a charming young man such as yourself
grabbed for it in a way that is so mistaken.”

Siddhartha smiled and bowed to her. “Yes, Kamala, you are quite right!
It would be a pity. It would be an awful pity. No, I do not want any drop
of sweetness from your mouth to be wasted on me, nor any drop of mine
wasted on you! Only one option remains for us. Siddhartha must come back
when he has the things that, at present, are lacking: clothes, shoes,
money. But, noble Kamala, tell me, can you not give me just one more piece
of advice?”

“A piece of advice Why not? Who would not be happy to give a piece of
advice to a poor and innocent samana, just come down from the woods where
the jackals live?”

“So tell me, dear Kamala, tell me where I should go so that I can obtain
these three things as quickly as possible?”

“There are many who would like to know that, my friend. You will have to
do what you have learnt to do, and take money for it, and clothes, and
shoes. There is no other way for a poor man to obtain money. What can you
do then?”

“I can think. I can wait. I can fast.”

“Is that all?”

“That is all. Wait, I can write poetry too. Will you give me a kiss in
exchange for a poem?”

“Yes, I will give you a kiss, if I like the poem. What is the title of
this poem then?”

Siddhartha thought about it for a moment, and then he spoke these verses:

  The shadowy grove where went the lovely Kamala,
  The entrance there, where stood the brown-skin’d samana,
  There bowed he deep, he saw the lotus flower,
  And Kamala thanked him with smiles and graciousness.
  ‘Tis lovely, thought he, to offer praise to gods,
  ‘Tis lovelier still to sacrifice all for her.
  The lovely Kamala clapped her bangled hands.

“Your verses are lovely, brown samana, and indeed I have nothing to lose
if I let you have a kiss for them.”

With a gesture of her eyes she drew him to herself, he leant his face to
hers and put his mouth on her mouth, which was like a fig newly broken
open. Kamala’s kiss was long, and Siddhartha felt deep astonishment at
how she taught him, at how wise she was, at how she mastered him, pushed
him away and drew him back, and at how this first kiss would be followed
by many more, a long, well ordered, well-tested series of kisses, each of
them different from the last, that awaited him. He remained standing,
breathing deeply, and at that moment he was amazed at the fullness of
knowledge, the fullness of things worth knowing, that promised themselves
to him in front of his eyes.

“Your verses are lovely,” Kamala declared, “if I were rich I would
give you a piece of gold for them. Though you will find it very hard to
gather as much money as you need by making up verses. You will, after all,
need such a lot of money if you want to be the friend of Kamala.”

“Th..the way you kiss, Kamala!” Siddhartha stammered.

“Yes, I am good at that, aren’t I. That is why I am never short of
clothes and shoes and jewelry and all those nice things. But what will
become of you? Can you think of nothing else but thinking and fasting and
making up verses?”

“I know the songs for performing sacrifice, too,” said Siddhartha,
“though I no longer wish to sing them. I know magic spells, too, though
I no longer wish to cast them. I have read the scriptures ...”

“Stop,” Kamala interrupted him. “You can read? And write?”

“Of course I can. There are many who can.”

“Most people cannot. Even I cannot. It is very good that you can read
and write, very good. You will even be able to put the magic spells to
good use.”

At that moment a servant girl came running and whispered something into
her mistress’s ear.

“I have a visitor,” Kamala declared. You must go Siddhartha, quickly,
you need to be aware that no-one should ever see you here! I will see you
again tomorrow.”

But she ordered the maid to give the pious brahmin a white shirt. Before
he knew what was happening to him the maid had led Siddhartha away through
indirect paths to a summerhouse, given him the shirt, drawn him into the
undergrowth and emphasised to him that he should leave the grove as
quickly as possible and without being seen by anyone.

He was content to do as he had been told. He was used to the woods and
made his way out of the grove and over the hedge without a sound. He was
content to make his way back into the town, the shirt, rolled into a
bundle, under his arm. He went to the door of a travellers’ hostel and
asked silently for food, and silently accepted a piece of rice cake. This
is probably the last day, he thought, when I will ever beg for food.

Pride suddenly flamed up in him. He was no longer a samana, it was no
longer appropriate for him to beg. He gave the rice cake to a dog and,
himself, went without food.

“Life here in the world is simple,” Siddhartha thought. “There are
no difficulties. When I was still a samana everything was difficult, it
took much effort and, in the end, it was without hope. Everything is easy
now, the lesson in kissing that Kamala gave me was easy. I need clothes
and money, that is all, and aims like that are petty and close at hand,
no-one would lose any sleep about them.”

He had long since discovered where Kamala’s house in the city was, and
the following day he arrived at its door.

“It is going well,” she called out to him. “You are expected by
Kamaswami, and he is the richest businessman in the city. If he likes you
he will take you into his service, so do be clever, won’t you, brown
samana. I have had others tell him all about you. Be friendly to him, he
is very powerful. But do not be too modest about yourself! I do not want
you to be just one of his servants, you will have to be his equal, or else
I will not be happy with you. Kamaswami is getting old, he is becoming
complacent. If he likes you he will place a lot of trust in you.”

Siddhartha thanked her and laughed, and when he told her he had eaten
nothing that day or the previous day she had bread and fruit brought for
him to eat.

“You have been lucky,” she told him as he left, “one door after
another is opening up for you. How could that be possible? Are you
performing magic?”

Siddhartha said, “Yesterday I told you I know how to think, to wait, and
to fast, but you thought that would be of no use. But it is very useful,
Kamala, you will see. You will see that the stupid samanas in the wood
learn to know and to do many nice things that you do not know how to do.
Two days ago I was just a ragged beggar, one day ago I had already kissed
Kamala, and soon I will be a businessman with money and with all the
things that you think are important.”

“I expect you will,” she conceded. “But where would you be without
me? What would become of you if Kamala did not help you?”

“Dear Kamala,” said Siddhartha, standing up straight, “when I came
to you in your grove it was I who made the first step. I was resolved to
learn the art of love from this most beautiful of women. From the very
moment when I formed this resolution I also knew that I would succeed in
it. I knew that you would help me, I knew it from the moment I first
glimpsed you at the entrance to the grove.”

“What if I had not wanted to?”

“You did want to. Kamala, listen: if you throw a stone into water it
drops quickly to the bottom by the fastest route it can. Siddhartha does
nothing, he waits, he thinks, he fasts, but he goes through the things of
the world like a stone through water without doing anything, without
making any effort; he is drawn, he lets himself fall. His objective pulls
him to itself, for he allows nothing into his soul that might work against
his objective. That, Kamala, is what Siddhartha learnt among the samanas.
That, Kamala, is what fools call magic in the supposition that it is
performed by demons. Nothing is ever performed by demons, there are no
demons. Anyone can perform magic, anyone can attain his objectives if he
is capable of thought, if he is capable of waiting, if he is capable of
fasting.”

Kamala listened to him. She loved his voice, she loved the look in his
eyes.

“Maybe, my friend,” she said quietly, “you are right in what you
say. Maybe it is also true that Siddhartha is an attractive man, that the
look of him will appeal to women, maybe that is what brings him all his
luck.”

With a kiss, Siddhartha took his leave. “I hope you are right, my
teacher. I hope the look of me will always please you, I hope you will
always bring me luck!”


AMONG THE CHILDLIKE PEOPLE

Siddhartha went to see Kamaswami the businessman, he was shown into a
house of opulence, servants led him past costly carpets into a chamber
where he waited for the master of the house.

Kamaswami entered, a fast-moving, nimble man with very grey hair, with
very clever and cautious eyes and an acquisitive-looking mouth. Master and
guest offered friendly greetings to each other.

“I am told,” the businessman began, “that you are a brahmin, a man
of learning, but you seek a position in the service of a businessman. Have
you fallen into need then, brahman, is that why you seek a position of
service?”

“No,” said Siddhartha, “I have not fallen into need and I never have
had difficulties. You should be aware that I come from the samanas, among
whom I lived for a long time.”

“How can you not be in need if you have come from the samanas? Do
samanas not live completely without possessions?”

“I am without possessions,” said Siddhartha, “if that is what you
mean. Certainly, I am without possessions. But I am without possessions by
my own free will, so I am not in need.”

“What do you think you will live on if you have no possessions?”

“I have never thought about that, sir. I have been without possessions
for more than three years, and have never given a thought to what I should
live on.”

“You have lived on the possessions of others then, have you?”

“That is what some would say. But a businessman, too, lives on the
possessions of others.”

“Well said. But he does not take the possessions of others for nothing;
he gives them his goods for them.”

“That does indeed seem to be their relationship. Each takes, each gives,
that is life.”

“But, if I may ask: if you have no possessions what do you have to
give?”

“Each gives what he has. The warrior gives strength, the businessman
gives goods, the teacher gives teaching, the farmer gives rice, the
fisherman gives fish.

“Very well. And what is it, then, that you have to give? What is it that
you have learnt to do?”

“I can think. I can wait. I can fast.”

“Is that all?”

“I think that is all!”

“And what is the good of that? Fasting, for instance, what is the good
of that?”

“It is a lot of good, sir. If a man has nothing to eat then fasting is
the cleverest thing of all that he can do. If, for instance, Siddhartha
had never learnt to fast he would now have to perform some kind of
service, be it for you or anyone else, for hunger would force him into it.
But now Siddhartha can wait in peace, he knows no impatience, he knows no
urgency, he can long withstand the siege of hunger and can laugh in its
face. That, sir, is the good of fasting.”

“You are right, samana. Wait a moment.”

Kamaswami went out and came back with a roll of paper which he handed to
his guest, asking, “Can you read this?”

Siddhartha looked at the roll on which a business contract was written and
began to read out what it said.

“Excellent,” said Kamaswami. “And now will you write something on
this sheet for me?”

He gave him pen and paper, and Siddhartha wrote and gave the sheet of
paper back.

Kamaswami read, “Writing is good, thinking is better. Cleverness is
good, patience is better.”

“You can write very well,” the businessman praised him. We will have a
lot to talk about together. For today, though, I ask you to be my guest
and to take up residence in this house.”

Siddhartha thanked him and accepted his offer, and now he lived in the
merchant’s house. Clothes were brought to him, and shoes, and a servant
prepared his bath for him every day. Twice a day a copious meal was
brought in, but Siddhartha ate only once a day and he neither ate flesh
nor drank wine. Kamaswami told him about his business, showed him his
goods and his warehouses, let him see his accounts. Siddhartha learned
many new things, he listened much and spoke little. He remembered the
words of Kamala and was never the merchant’s subordinate, he forced him
to see him as his equal, even to treat him as more than his equal.
Kamaswami took great care over his business, often even showing passion
for it, but Siddhartha saw it all as a game. He made the effort to learn
the rules of the game, but the content of the game did not touch his
heart.

Siddhartha had not been long in Kamaswami’s house before he took part in
its owner’s business affairs. Every day, but at the time she stipulated,
he would visit the beautiful Kamala, wearing fine clothes, fine shoes, and
he soon began also to bring her presents. He learned a lot from her red
and skillful mouth. He learned a lot from her gentle and supple hand. In
matters of love Siddhartha was still a child, he was inclined to throw
himself blindly and insatiably into his pleasures as if into a bottomless
pit, but Kamala taught him from the very basics, she taught him that you
cannot receive pleasure without giving pleasure, that every gesture, every
stroke, every touch, every look, every tiny part of the body has its
secret, and waking those secrets will bring happiness to whoever knows
about them. She taught him that lovers should never separate immediately
after the celebration of their love, not without each admiring the other,
not without having conquered and having been conquered, so that neither
will feel over-sated or abandoned or cross, or feel that one has misused
the other or feel to have been misused. The hours he spent with this
clever and beautiful artist were a time of wonder, he became her student,
her lover, her friend. The value and meaning of his life now lay here with
Kamala, not with the business affairs of Kamaswami.

The businessman delegated the writing of important letters and contracts
to him, and formed the habit of seeking his advice on all important
decisions. He saw quickly that Siddhartha knew little about rice and wool,
about shipping and commerce, but he saw that what he did brought good
luck, he saw that Siddhartha knew far more than he about peace and
equanimity, about the art of listening, and saw his acumen in
understanding strangers. “This brahmin,” he said to a friend, “is
not a proper businessman and he never will be, his soul never goes into
affairs with any passion. But he has the secret of people to whom success
comes of itself. Maybe it is because he was born under a good star, maybe
it is magic, and maybe it is something he learned when he lived with the
samanas. He only ever seems to be playing at business, business never
seems to penetrate him, never to be his master, he never fears failure and
he is never bothered by making a loss.”

The friend advised the businessman, “Give him a third of the profit of
all the business he does for you, and let him bear the same proportion of
the losses when they happen. That will make him more enthusiastic.”

Kamaswami followed this advice. But Siddhartha seemed little bothered by
it. If he made a profit he accepted it with indifference; if he made a
loss he would laugh and say, “Oh look, that did not go well!”

It did indeed seem that he was indifferent to affairs of business. One day
he went out to a village to buy up a large harvest of rice, but when he
arrived the rice had already been sold to another handler. Siddhartha
nonetheless remained for several days in the village, making the farmers
his guests, giving copper coins to their children, attended a wedding
ceremony, and came back from his journey entirely happy and content.
Kamaswami accused him of squandering time and money by not having come
straight back. Siddhartha answered, “Do not tell me off, my friend!
Nothing has ever been achieved by telling anyone off. If I have caused you
to make a loss just let me bear it. I am very satisfied with this journey.
I met many new people, a brahmin is now my friend, children played on my
knees, farmers showed me their fields, no-one treated me there like a
businessman.”

“That sounds all very nice,” exclaimed Kamaswami grudgingly, “but I
should have thought that a businessman is what you actually are! Or did
you go out there just for your own pleasure?”

“Certainly,” laughed Siddhartha, “certainly it was for my own
pleasure that I went there. Why else would I have gone there? I have met
new people, seen new places, enjoyed trust and friendliness, found
friendship. Listen my friend, if I were Kamaswami I would have hurried
back as soon as I saw that my attempt to purchase was in vain, I would
have been full of annoyance, and in that case then time and money really
would have gone to waste. As it is I have spent several days well, I have
learned things, I have enjoyed the company of friends, I have done no harm
to myself or anyone else either by getting cross or by being in too much
of a hurry. And if I ever go there again, to buy a harvest in advance for
instance or for any other reason, I will have a friendly welcome from
cheerful people, and I will congratulate myself for not having been rushed
or bad tempered this time. So leave things well enough alone, my friend,
don’t harm yourself by telling me off! If the day ever comes when you
see that Siddhartha has brought you any harm then just say the word and
Siddhartha will go on his way. But till then let us just be content with
each other as we are.”

The businessman tried to persuade Siddhartha by saying he was eating his,
Kamaswami’s, bread, but this too was in vain. It was his own bread that
he ate, or rather both of them ate the bread of others, the bread of
everyone. Siddhartha never had an ear for Kamaswami’s worries, and
Kamaswami made many worries for himself. If a deal was in process that
might go badly, if goods dispatched seemed to have been lost, if a debtor
seemed unable to pay, Kamaswami was never able to convince his co-worker
that it would be of any use to speak words of anger or concern, to furrow
one’s brow, to lose any sleep. One time when Kamaswami reproached
Siddhartha the claim that everything he knew he had learned from him,
Siddhartha replied, “Don’t be so ridiculous! What I have learnt from
you is the price of a basket of fish and how much interest you can exact
for money you lend. Those things are your kind of knowledge. You have
never taught me to think, my dear Kamaswami, it might be better if you
wanted to learn thinking from me.”

It was true that Siddhartha’s heart was not in business. Business was
good for him to obtain money for Kamala, and he obtained much more than he
needed. Moreover, Siddhartha was only concerned with people. Their
business, craft, worries, pleasures and follies had earlier been as
strange and distant as the moon, but now he took an interest in them. He
had no difficulty in talking with everyone, to live with everyone, to
learn from everyone, but the easier this was the more he became aware that
there was something that separated him from them, and that was because he
had been a samana. He saw how people lived their lives in a way that was
like children or animals, something he both loved and despised. He saw
their strivings, saw their sufferings and saw them turn grey about things
that seemed to him not worth that price, about money, about petty
pleasures, matters of petty honour, he saw them shouting and insulting
each other, he saw them lamenting for pains which a samana would merely
smile at, and for losses which a samana does not feel.

He was open to everything that these people brought him. The businessman
was welcome who brought canvas for him to buy, the debtor was welcome who
came asking for a loan, the beggar was welcome who spent an hour to tell
him the story of his poverty but who was not half as poor as any samana.
He behaved toward the rich foreign businessman in the same way as to the
servant who shaved him or the street seller, and would allow him to cheat
him of a few petty coins when he bought bananas. When Kamaswami came to
him to lament his troubles or to accuse him of having handled a deal badly
he listened to him with cheerful interest, wondered about him, tried to
understand him, acknowledged that he was right on some small points when
he had to, and then he would turn away to the next person who wanted his
attention. And there were many who did want it, many who came to do
business with him, many who came to cheat him, many who came to obtain
information from him, many who wanted his pity, many who wanted his
advice. He gave advice, he showed pity, he gave advice, he allowed himself
to be cheated, slightly, and all this game, and all the passion with which
all these people played it, occupied his thoughts just as much as, at one
time, thoughts about the gods and about Brahman.

From time to time he would feel, deep in his breast, a faint and tender
voice that gently admonished, gently complained, so gentle he was hardly
aware of it. Then he would become aware for an hour of what an odd life he
was leading, that he was doing all these things just as a game, that
although he was cheerful and felt moments of pleasure his real life was
flowing past without touching him. He played with his business affairs and
the people he came into contact with in the same way as a sportsman plays
with his ball, he watched them and found fun in so doing; in his heart, in
the source of his being, he was not present. There was a place where that
source flowed, but how far that place was from him, flowing and flowing
out of sight, no longer had anything to do with his life. And there were
times when he was alarmed at thoughts of this sort, and he wished he too
could be granted a passion for all the childish to activity of the day, to
take part in it with his heart, truly to live, truly to do, truly to enjoy
life instead of just standing at one side of it as an onlooker. But he
always went back to the beautiful Kamala, learned the art of love,
practised the cult of lust by which, more than anywhere else, giving and
taking become the same thing, he talked with her, learned from her, gave
her his advice, accepted her advice. She understood him better than
Govinda once had, she was more like him than Govinda had been.

One day he said to her, “You are like me, you are different from most
people. You are Kamala, nothing else, and deep inside you there is peace
and a refuge where you can go at any time and feel that that is your
place, just as I can. Few people have that, though all people could have
it.”

“Not all people are clever,” said Kamala.

“No,” said Siddhartha, “that is not what it is about. Kamaswami is
just as clever as I am, but he has no place of refuge within himself.
Others have one, people whose understanding is like that of a small child.
Most people, Kamala, are like a leaf falling through the air and is blown
from side to side, it twists, it staggers, till it hits the ground. There
are others, though not many, who are like the stars, they follow a fixed
course, no wind blows them, they have their laws and their path set within
themselves. All the learned men and all the samanas - and I have known
many of them - had one of this sort among them, a perfect one, and I can
never forget him. He is Gotama, the noble one who disseminated that
teaching. Thousands of young men listen to his teachings every day, they
follow his precepts every hour of every day, but each one of them is a
falling leaf, they do not have law and teachings within themselves.”

Kamala looked at him with a smile. “You are talking about him again,”
she said, “you have your samana thoughts again.”

Siddhartha was silent, and they played the game of love, one of the thirty
or forty different games that Kamala knew. Her body was as supple as a
jaguar’s, and as the bow of a hunter; whoever learned the art of love
from her came to know many joys, many secrets. She played long with
Siddhartha, she drew him close, pushed him back, manipulated him,
enveloped him: he enjoyed his mastery until he had been defeated and then,
exhausted, he would rest at her side.

The courtesan leant over him, looked long into his face, into his now
tired eyes.

“You are the best lover,” she said thoughtfully, “I have ever known.
You are stronger than the others, more supple, more willing. You have
learnt my art well, Siddhartha. One day, when I am older, I would like to
have a child from you. But, my love, you have never stopped being a
samana, and that means you do not love me, there is no-one whom you love.
Am I right?”

“You might well be right,” said Siddhartha, tired. “I am like you.
You do not love either - if you did, how could you carry on with love
making as a craft? Perhaps people like you and me cannot love. The
childlike people can; that is their secret.”


SANSARA

Siddhartha had spent a long time in the world of pleasure, though without
being a part of it. In his years as a devoted samana he had put his senses
to death but now they woke anew, he had tasted riches, tasted
voluptuousness, tasted power; but in his heart he had remained a samana
throughout this lengthy time, just as Kamala, clever Kamala, had seen. His
life had been directed by the art of thinking, of waiting, of fasting, and
it continued to be so. The people of the world, the childlike people,
continued to be strangers for him, just as he was a stranger for them.

The years went by and Siddhartha, wrapped in affluence, barely noticed how
each of them passed away. He had become rich, he had long been the owner
of his own house with servants and a garden by the river just outside the
city. People liked him, they came to him when they needed money or advice,
but, apart from Kamala, no-one was close to him.

That lofty, bright awareness that he had once experienced at the high
point of his youth in the days after Gotama’s sermon, the time since the
separation from Govinda, that taut expectation, that proud independence
without teachings and without a teacher, that readiness to hear the voice
of the divine from many sources, including his own heart, all this had
slowly turned into mere memories, had become something ephemeral; the
source of holiness that had once been near to had him become something
distant, something whose murmurings had become quiet, though it had once
murmured within him. It was true that much of what he had learned from the
samanas, that he had learned from Gotama, that he had learned from his
father the Brahmin, had remained within in him through this time: a modest
life, the joy of thinking, hours in meditation, secret knowledge of his
self, the eternal self which is neither body nor awareness. Much of it
remained within him, but the rest had little by little sunk down and
become covered in dust. Like the potter’s wheel that, once set turning,
will continue long to turn, and only slowly will tire and lose its motion,
the wheel of asceticism in Siddhartha’s soul, the wheel of thinking, the
wheel of discernment, continued to turn and was still turning, but it
turned slowly and hesitantly and was close to stopping. Slowly, like damp
that soaks into the trunk of a dying tree, slowly filling it and making it
decay, the world and apathy had insidiously soaked into Siddhartha’s
soul, slowly filling it and making it heavy, making it tired. His senses,
though, gained vigour, for they had learned much, experienced much.

Siddhartha had learned how to do business, how to exercise power over
people, to have pleasure with women, he had learned to wear nice clothes,
to give orders to servants, to bathe in perfumed water. He had learned to
eat dainty and carefully prepared foods, even to eat fish and meat and
fowl, spices and sweet things, to drink wine that makes you weary and
forgetful. He had learned to play with dice and on the chess board, to
observe dancers, to be carried on a litter and to sleep on a soft bed. But
he had always felt he was different from others, superior to them, he
always looked on them with a touch of laughter, with a touch of jeering
contempt, with that very contempt that a samana always feels for people of
the world. When Kamaswami was in a bad mood, when he became quarrelsome,
when he felt he had been treated badly, when he felt over-burdened with
the worries of business, Siddhartha had always found it laughable. But
slowly and imperceptibly, as harvest times and rainy seasons came and
went, his contemptuous laughter became more tired, his sense of
superiority became subdued. Only slowly, there among his increasing
wealth, Siddhartha had taken on something of the character of the
childlike people, something of their naivety, something of their anxiety.
And yet he envied them, and the more like them he became the more he
envied them. He envied them for the one thing he did not have and they did
have, he envied them for the importance they attributed to their lives, he
envied the passion they felt in their joys and sorrows, envied the worried
but sweet happiness they had in their never-ending loves. Their love for
themselves, for women, for their children, for money or honours, for hopes
and plans, these people were always in love with something. But it was not
from them that he learned this, especially not their childlike joys and
childlike follies; what he learned from them was the unpleasant things,
the things he himself despised. More and more often, in the morning after
spending the evening with friends he would lie long in bed feeling dull
and tired. When Kamaswami bored him with his worries he would become
irritable and impatient. When he lost a game playing at dice he would
laugh much too loudly. His face was still cleverer and more spiritual than
others’ but it seldom laughed, and one by one it took on the features so
often seen in the face of rich people, features of discontent, of poor
health, of surliness, of apathy, of indifference to others. Slowly, the
sickness of the soul seen in rich people took hold of him.

Weariness sank over Siddhartha like a veil, like a light mist that with
every day became a little heavier, every month a little thicker, every
year a little heavier. As when a new garment becomes old with time, loses
its bright colours with time, gathers stains, gathers creases, becomes
worn at its hems and, here and there, begins to show places that are worn
and threadbare, so Siddhartha’s new life that he had begun when he took
his leave of Govinda had become old, with the quickly passing years it had
lost its colour and its sheen, it had gathered stains and creases. This
ugly sight was hidden at the base of it but here and there it could
already be seen, disappointment and disgust lay in wait for him.
Siddhartha did not notice. He noticed only that the bright and certain
voice of his inside which once had woken within him and had led him
through his years of splendour had now become silent.

The world had taken possession of him, fun, lust, apathy, and lastly that
very vice that he had most despised and for which he had had the most
contempt because of its folly, greed. Even property, the owning of riches,
had finally taken hold of him, it was no longer a frivolous game, it had
become his chains and his burden. It was an odd and insidious path that
had led Siddhartha into this final and most contemptible of dependencies,
playing dice. To be exact, as soon as, in his heart, he had ceased to be a
samana, he had begun to gamble for money and dainty luxuries. He had
previously despised these things, he had previously taken part in them
with laughing indifference as one of the things done by the childlike
people, but now he took part with growing aggressivity and passion. Other
gamblers viewed him with fear, few would dare to play against him because
the stakes he laid down were so high and audacious. Something in his heart
compelled him to gamble, money was something miserable and when he lost,
when he threw it away, it brought him a haughty pleasure, there was no
more ostentatious way, no more contemptuous way that he could display his
disdain for riches, the idol of businessmen. So he gambled high and
without reserve, he hated himself for this, he despised himself for it, he
threw it in by the thousand, threw it away by the thousand, he lost money,
lost jewelry, lost a country house, then he won again, then he lost again.
The anxiety, every terrible and oppressive anxiety he felt while throwing
the dice for worryingly high stakes was something he loved, he always
sought to renew it, always to raise it, always to tickle it a little
higher, for it was in this feeling alone that he could feel something like
happiness, something like inebriation, something like a higher kind of
life in among the sated, lukewarm, insipid life he led.

Every time he lost a large amount he thought of gaining new riches, threw
himself into business with new vigour and pressed his debtors harder to
make them pay, for he wished to gamble again, he wanted to squander again,
wanted, again, to display the contempt he had for riches. Siddhartha no
longer had the indifference he had had when he lost, he no longer had the
patience he had shown for bad debtors, no longer had the goodwill he had
practised toward beggars, no longer had the joy he had felt when he made
gifts or lent money to them who asked, knowing it would not be repaid. He
would stake ten thousand on a throw of the dice and laugh when he lost it,
but in his business affairs he became stricter and pettier, and at night
he sometimes dreamt of money! Whenever he awoke from this vile
enchantment, whenever he looked in the mirror on the bedroom wall and saw
his face changed and uglier, whenever he felt beset by shame and disgust,
then he would flee from it, he would flee into new games of chance, flee
into the numbness of lust, the numbness of wine, and from there flee back
into piling up more possessions. He ran around in this meaningless circle
until he was tired, until he was old, until he was ill.

Until he was admonished in a dream. He had spent the evening hours with
Kamala in her gorgeous pleasure garden. They had sat talking under the
trees, and Kamala offered some well-considered words, words with sorrow
and tiredness hidden behind them. She had asked him to tell her about
Gotama and could not hear enough about him, the clarity of his eyes, the
quiet beauty of his mouth, the benevolence of his smile, the peace of his
walk. He had to tell her about the noble buddha for great lengths of time,
and Kamala would sigh and say, “One day, perhaps one day soon, I will go
and follow this buddha too. I will give my pleasure garden to him and take
refuge in his teachings.” But then she would tease him, she would lead
him into playful lovemaking, she would chain him to her with a passion
that was painful, with biting, with tears, as if she wanted, just once
more, to press the last drops of sweetness out of this life of vain and
short-lived fun. Never had it been so exceptionally clear to Siddhartha
how close lust is to death. Then he would lie at her side and Kamala’s
face would come close to his, and, clearer than ever before, he would read
a message of anxiety under her eyes and at the corners of her mouth, a
script of fine lines, of slight wrinkles, a script reminiscent of Autumn
and of growing old just as Siddhartha was himself growing old, for he was
now in his forties and had noticed grey hairs here and there among the
black ones. Tiredness could be read on Kamala’s beautiful face,
tiredness from traveling a long road that has no happy ending, tiredness
and the start of her decline, and hidden there, not yet spoken of, was an
anxiety that she was not yet aware of: fear of old age, fear of the
Autumn, fear of the certainty of death. He had taken his leave of her with
a sigh, his soul full of lethargy, full of concealed anxiety.

One time, when Siddhartha had spent an evening at home with wine and
dancing girls, when he had played the superior with his peers, though he
no longer was their superior, when he had drunk a great deal of wine and,
tired but excited, he had not gone to seek his rest until long after
midnight, he found himself in a state of despair and was close to tears.
He waited long in the vain pursuit of sleep, his heart full of a sorrow
that he thought he could no longer bear, full of disgust that seemed to
permeate every part of him like the vile taste of lukewarm wine, like the
over-sweet and vapid music, like the over-soft smiles on the dancers’
faces, like the over-sweet scent on their hair and their breasts. But what
disgusted him more than anything else was himself, his perfumed hair, the
smell of wine in his mouth, the tired slackness and the dullness of his
skin. Just as one who has eaten or drunk too much will endure his vomiting
and even feel glad at the relief it brings, so Siddhartha, unable to
sleep, felt a gush of monstrous disgust and wished to be relieved of these
pleasures, these habits, this entire life of meaninglessness. It was only
when the first light of morning came, and the activities in the street in
front of his house began to wake, that he drowsed, for a few moments felt
some slight assuagement of his anguish, found something resembling sleep.
And that was when he began to dream:

Kamala had a small and rare songbird that she kept in a golden cage. It
was of this songbird that he dreamed. He dreamt: the bird had become
silent, though it had formerly always sung in the morning time, and when
he noticed this he went to the cage and looked in. There he saw the little
bird lying dead and stiff on the floor. He took it out, held it for a
while in his hand and then threw it away, out into the street. At that
moment he felt horror at what he had done and felt such pain in his heart
as if he had thrown out everything of any value, everything of any good
about himself when he threw this bird out.

Waking from this dream he felt himself possessed by a deep sorrow.
Worthless, it seemed to him, worthless and meaningless was the life he had
been leading; nothing living, nothing that was in anyway beautiful or
worth keeping had remained with him. He stood there alone and empty, like
a castaway on the shore.

In low spirits, Siddhartha betook himself to one of the pleasure gardens
he owned, he locked the gate, sat down under a mango tree, felt the death
in his heart and bleakness in his heart, he sat and felt how something in
him was dying, wilting, coming to its end. Gradually he gathered his
thoughts together and, in his mind, walked once more along the whole of
his life’s path, beginning at the first day when he was able to think.
When was it that he had ever been happy, felt any real joy? Oh yes, he had
experienced these things many times. He had tasted that joy when, as a
boy, he had been praised by the brahmins and he felt it in his heart,
“There is a path that follows from recitation of holy scripture, from
argument with the learned ones, from excelling when assisting in the
performance of sacrifice,” Then, what he felt in his heart was, “There
is a path for you to follow, the path to which you are called, the gods
are expecting you.” And again when he was a young man because his
thoughts rose ever higher, they tore out and away from the commonplace
many who had the same objectives, because he was in accord with the
sufferings and the meanings of Brahman, because when he attained new
wisdom it would only arouse thirst for more knowledge, because, held in
this thirst, held in the pain of this self, he had always again felt,
“Forward! Forward! You have received the call!” He had accepted this
call when he left home and chose the life of a samana, and again when he
left the samanas and sought the path of perfection, although that was also
a path into the unknown. How long was it, now, that he had not heard that
voice, how long was it since he had attained any new heights, how level
and barren had his path become? It had been many years, years without any
higher objective, no thirsting, no rising, content with petty pleasures
and nonetheless never satisfied! Throughout all these years, without
knowing it himself, he had striven to be a person like these masses, he
had longed for it, to be like these children and in the process had made a
life for himself that was much more poor and miserable than theirs, for
their objectives were not his objectives, nor were their worries his
worries, all this world of people like Kamaswami had been just a game for
him, a dance to be looked at, a comedy. Kamala alone was dear to him, was
something he valued - but was she still? Did he still need him, or he her?
Were they not playing a game without end? Was it necessary to live a life
for that? No, it was not necessary? The name of this game was sansara, a
children’s game, a game that it was good to play one, twice, ten times -
but over and over again?

Then Siddhartha came to see that the game was at its end, that he was no
longer able to play it. A shudder ran down his body, in his innermost
parts, as he felt that something had died.

All that day he sat under the mango tree thinking of his father, thinking
of Govinda, thinking of Gotama. Had he really had to leave these people
and become a Kamaswami? He still sat there as night began to fall. When
looked up and saw the stars he thought, “Here I am, sitting under my own
mango tree, in my own pleasure garden.” A faint smile came to his face -
was it necessary, then, was it proper, was it not a foolish game to be the
owner of a mango tree, to be the owner of a garden?

He put an end to this too, this too died within him. He rose, took his
leave of the mango tree, took his leave of the pleasure garden. He had not
eaten all day and so felt very hungry, he thought of his house in the
city, of his chambers there and his bed, he thought of the table laden
with food. With a weary smile he shook his head and took his leave of
these things.

There and then, at that hour of the night, Siddhartha left his garden,
left the city and never returned to them. Kamaswami had his servants
search long for him, he thought he had fallen into the hands of bandits.
Kamala did not send anyone to search for him. She was not surprised when
she heard of Siddhartha’s disappearance. Was it not something she had
always expected? Was he not a samana, a pilgrim without a home? And she
had felt it most of all when she was last with him, and deep within her
pain at losing him she was glad, glad that she had drawn him so deep into
her heart that last time she saw him, glad that she had once more felt so
entirely possessed and pervaded by him.

When she first received the news of Siddhartha’s disappearance she
crossed to the window, where she kept a rare songbird captive in a golden
cage. She opened the door of the cage, took the bird out and let him fly
away. She looked long after him as he flew. From that day on she received
no more visitors and kept her house closed. But some while later she
became aware that her last meeting with Siddhartha had left her pregnant.


BESIDE THE RIVER

Siddhartha wandered through the woods, already far from the city, and he
knew just one thing, that he could never go back, that this life that he
had lived through many years was ended and gone, he had tasted its joys,
sucked out its pleasures, till it disgusted him. The songbird he had
dreamt of was dead. The songbird in his heart was dead. He had been
entangled deep in sansara, he had drawn death and disgust into himself
from every side, like a sponge sucking in water till it is saturated. He
was full of weariness, full of misery, full of death, there was nothing
more in the world that could appeal to him, could give him pleasure, could
give him reassurance.

He yearned to know nothing more about himself, to have peace, to be dead.
If only a thunderbolt would come and strike him down! If only a tiger
would come and eat him! If only he had wine, poison, that would numb his
senses, oblivion and sleep, never more to wake! Was there any kind of
filth left with which he had not already besmirched himself, was there any
kind of sin or folly that he had not committed, anything he had not done
that for his soul was entirely fruitless? Was it even possible still to
live? Was it possible to draw in breath, let out breath over and over
again, to feel hunger, once more to eat, once more to sleep, once more to
lay with a woman? Was this circle not, for him, exhausted and closed off?

Siddhartha arrived at the great river that flowed through the wood, the
same river that the ferryman had taken him across when he was a young man
and had just departed from Gotama’s community. On the bank of this river
he stopped and he stood there, uncertain what to do. He was weak from
tiredness and hunger, and why should he go on, where to, what for? No, he
had no objectives any more, there was nothing but the deep and sorrowful
yearning to shake all this barren dream from himself, to pour away this
stale wine, to put an end to this pitiful and shameful life.

There was a tree that hung over the river bank, a coconut tree. Siddhartha
leant his shoulder against it, put his arms around the trunk and looked
down into the green water as it continued to flow beneath him. He looked
down into it and found himself possessed with the wish to let go of the
tree and to perish in the water. A grisly emptiness was reflected back at
him from the water, a reflection that showed the awful emptiness of his
soul. Yes, he had come to the end. There was nothing more for him than to
extinguish himself, than to strike down the picture of deformity that was
his life, to throw it down at the feet of the gods who laugh at him in
contempt. This was the great breakthrough that he had longed for: death,
the destruction of the form he hated! The fish could come and eat him,
Siddhartha the dog, the deluded, the decayed and putrid body and the
flaccid and abused soul! The fish and the crocodiles could come and eat
him, the demons could dismember him!

His face distorted into a scowl he stared into the water, saw his
distorted face mirrored back at him, and he spat at it. Deep in tiredness
he loosened his arm from the tree trunk and twisted round slightly so that
he would fall vertically and finally go under. With eyes closed he sank
down to meet his death.

From some distant place his soul began to twitch, from some time past in
his tired life came a sound. It was one word, one syllable which he
uttered to himself without a thought and with voice that mumbled, the
ancient word that formed the beginning and the end of any brahmanist
prayer, the holy word “OM”, meaning “perfection” or
“completion.” And at the moment when the sound of “Om” touched
Siddhartha’s ear his dormant spirit suddenly awoke and saw the folly of
what he was doing.

Siddhartha was deeply shocked. So this was the state he had come to, this
was how lost he was, how confused. He was so forsaken by any kind of
wisdom that he was able to seek death, that this whim, this childish whim,
could have grown within him: to find peace by extinguishing his body! All
that he had recently suffered, all the disillusionment, all the doubts,
none of these things had the effect on him that Om had at that moment as
it entered his consciousness: and he became able to see his misery and his
folly.

Om! he said to himself: Om! And he knew of Brahman, knew that life could
not be destroyed, knew once more everything about the divine that he had
forgotten.

All this, however, lasted for just one moment, just a flash. Siddhartha
sank down at the foot of the coconut tree, lay down exhausted, and
muttering Om he laid his head on the root of the tree and sank into a deep
sleep.

Deep was his sleep and free of dreams, he had not known sleep like this
for a long time. Many hours later when he woke it seemed to him that ten
years had gone by, he heard the gentle flow of the water, did not know
where he was or who had brought him there, abruptly he opened his eyes and
was amazed to see trees and the sky above him, and then he remembered
where he was and how he had arrived there. This process took a long time,
though, and the past seemed to him to have had a veil thrown over it, it
was infinitely far, it lay at infinite distance, infinitely meaningless.
He knew only that his previous life (at first as he came back to his
senses, this previous life seemed like something lying long in the past,
an earlier incarnation, an early birth of his present self), that his
previous life was something he had left behind, that, full of disgust and
misery, he had even wanted to throw his life away, that instead he had
regained consciousness at the side of a river under a coconut tree with
the holy word Om on his lips, that he had then slept and now had woken and
he looked at the world as a new person. Quietly, he spoke the word Om to
himself, as he had done while he was falling asleep, and it seemed that
all the time that he had been asleep had been nothing but a long immersion
into saying Om, into thinking Om, a submersion and envelopment in Om, in
the nameless, in the perfect.

It had been such a wonderful sleep! Sleeping had never before left him so
refreshed, so renewed, so rejuvenated! Could it be that he really had
died, had gone under and now been reborn in a new form? No, he knew
himself, he knew his hand and his feet, knew the play where he lay, knew
this self in his breast, this Siddhartha, the headstrong, the odd, this
Siddhartha however was transformed, renewed, he had slept remarkably well
and now he was remarkably alert, joyful and inquisitive.

Siddhartha sat up straight and saw a man facing him, a strange man, a monk
in yellow robes with shaven head and in a position of meditation. He
looked at the man, who had hair neither on his head nor his face, and he
had not looked at him for long before he saw that this monk was Govinda,
his childhood friend, Govinda who had taken refuge with the noble Buddha.
Govinda had changed, just as he had, but he still bore the old features in
his face that spoke of zeal, of loyalty, of searching, of fastidiousness.
Govinda felt now that Siddhartha was watching him, opened his eyes and
returned his gaze. Siddhartha saw that Govinda did not recognise him.
Govinda was glad to see that he had woken, he had clearly long been
sitting here waiting for him to wake even though he did not know him.

“I have been sleeping,” said Siddhartha. “What has brought you
here?”

“You have been sleeping,” Govinda answered. “It is not good to sleep
in places such as this where there are many snakes and where the beasts of
the forest follow their paths. I, sir, am a follower of the noble Gotama,
of the buddha, of the Sakyamuni, and when I and a number of members of our
movement were travelling along this path in pilgrimage I saw you lying
there asleep in a place where to sleep is dangerous. I therefore tried to
wake you, sir, and as I saw that your sleep was very deep I remained
behind my colleagues and sat beside you. And then, it seems, I fell asleep
myself despite my wish to watch over you as you slept. I performed my task
badly, tiredness overcame me. But now, now that you are awake, please
allow me to leave you and catch up with my brothers.”

“Thank you for watching over my sleep, samana,” said Siddhartha.
“You followers of the noble one are helpful. You are free to go.”

“I will go, sir. May you always fare well.”

“Thank you, samana.”

Govinda made the gesture of greeting and said, “Farewell.”

“Farewell, Govinda,” said Siddhartha.

The monk remained where he was.

“Sir, may I ask how you know my name?”

Siddhartha smiled.

“I know you, Govinda, I know you from your father’s hut and from the
brahmins’ school, I know you from the sacrifices we performed and from
our journey to join the samanas, I know you from that time when, in the
grove of Jetavana, you took refuge with the noble one.”

“You are Siddhartha!” exclaimed Govinda out loud. “Now I recognise
you, and I cannot understand why I did not recognise immediately. Welcome,
Siddhartha, it is a great joy for me to see you again.”

“And it is a great joy for me too to see you. It was you who watched
over me as I slept, and I thank you again for it, although I had no need
of anyone to do so. Where are you going, my friend?”

“I am not going anywhere. We monks are always travelling, except in the
rainy season, we always move from place to place, we live according to our
rules, we spread out teachings, accept alms and then we move on. It is
always so. But you, Siddhartha, where are you going?”

Siddhartha said, “It is the same with me as with you, my friend. I am
not going anywhere. I am simply travelling. I am on a pilgrimage.”

Govinda said, “You say you are on a pilgrimage, and I believe you. But,
Siddhartha forgive me, you do not look like a pilgrim. You wear the
clothes of a rich man, you wear the shoes of a man of elegance, your hair
smells of scented water and it is not the hair of a pilgrim, not the hair
of a samana.”

“Yes, my friend, well observed, your sharp eye sees everything. But I
did not tell you I am a samana. I said I am on a pilgrimage, and that is
what I am, on a pilgrimage.”

“You are on a pilgrimage,” said Govinda. “I have been going on
pilgrimage for many years, but I have never come across a pilgrim like
this. There are not many who go on pilgrimage in clothes like this, or in
shoes like this or with hair like this.”

“I believe you, my friend. But now, today, you have just a pilgrim like
this, in shoes like this, with clothes like this. Remember this, my
friend: The world of forms is transitory, our clothes are highly
transitory, just like the way we have our hair and the hair itself and our
bodies themselves. I am wearing the clothes of a rich man, you are quite
right about what you have seen. I am wearing them because I was a rich
man, and my hair is like the hair of a libertine or men of the world,
because I was a libertine and a man of the world.”

“And now, Siddhartha, what are you now?”

“I do not know, I do not know it any more than you do. I am on a
journey. I was a rich man and now I am not; and nor do I know what I will
be tomorrow.”

“Did you lose all your riches?”

“I lost them, or they lost me. I no longer have them. The wheel of forms
spins fast, Govinda. Where is Siddhartha the brahmin? Where is Siddhartha
the samana. Where is the wealth of Siddhartha? Things that are transitory
change fast, Govinda, you know that.”

Govinda stared long at his childhood friend, his eyes full of doubt. Then,
using words that were very polite, he said goodbye and went on his way.

With a smile on his face, Siddhartha watched him as he went, he loved him
still, faithful Govinda, conscientious Govinda. And how, at that moment,
at that magnificent time after such a wonderful sleep permeated with Om,
how could he not have loved someone and something? This was the very magic
that had taken place in him by the power of Om while he was sleeping, he
loved everything, he was filled with joyful love for everything he saw. It
was also the reason, it seemed to him now, why he had earlier been very
ill and unable to love anything or anyone.

With a smile on his face, Siddhartha watched the monk as he went. He felt
much stronger after his sleep, but he was nonetheless painfully hungry as
he had not eaten for two days and the time was long past when he had been
hardened against hunger. With some sorrow, but also with laughter, he
thought about that time. In those days, he remembered, he had boasted of
three things to Kamala, three noble and invincible arts that he had
mastered: fasting, waiting, thinking. These were his possessions, his
power and his skill, his firm and trusty staff, these three arts were what
he had learned in the hard-working and arduous years of his youth, these
and no others. And now he had abandoned them, not one of them was in his
possession any longer, not fasting, not waiting, not thinking. He had
thrown them away for the most miserable of desires, for the most
short-lived, for sensual pleasure, for affluence, for riches! They had
rarely done him any good. And now, it seemed, he really had become one of
the childlike people.

Siddhartha thought about his position. Thinking came hard to him, there
was nothing in him that wanted to do it, but he forced himself.

Now, he thought, as all these transitory things have slipped away from me,
now I stand here under the sun again as I did before when I was a small
child, there is nothing that belongs to me, there is nothing I can do,
nothing I am capable of doing, there is nothing I have learnt. This is
wonderful! Now, when I am no longer young, when my hair is already
half-grey, when my strength is beginning to fade, now is the time for me
to start again from the beginning and be a child again! His fortunes had
indeed been odd! He had been on a downward path and now he stood in the
world once again penniless and naked and stupid. But he was unable to feel
any concern about this, no, he even felt a strong urge to laugh, to laugh
at himself, to laugh at this bizarre, ridiculous world.

“You’re on a downward path!” he said to himself, and laughed about
it, and as he spoke his glance fell on the river, and he saw that the
river was on a downward path too, always migrating downwards and, as it
did so, it sang and was gay. He found that very pleasing, and he gave the
river a friendly smile. Was this not the river in which he had wanted to
drown himself, some time in the past, a hundred years ago, or had he
dreamt it?

My life truly has been wonderful, he thought, wonderful are the varied
courses it has taken. As a boy I had nothing to do with anything but the
gods and making sacrifices to them. As an adolescent I had nothing to do
with anything but asceticism, with thinking and meditation, I sought to
find Brahman, venerated the eternal in Atman. As a young man, though, I
followed the path of penitence, lived in the forest, suffered heat and
frost, learnt to hunger, taught my body to die away. It was wonderful
when, at that time, knowledge came to me through the teachings of the
great buddha, I felt knowledge of the unity of the world, felt it flow
within me like my own blood. But I had to go on my way even from the
buddha and that great knowledge. I went on and learnt the joy of love from
Kamala, learned business skills from Kamaswami, accumulated money, wasted
money, learned to love my stomach, learned to flatter my senses. It took
me many years to lose my spirit, to lose the ability to think, to forget
unity. Is it not so, that I went slowly and by circuitous routes from
being a man to being a child, from a thinking being to a childlike being?
This was a very good way, though, and the bird within my breast did not
die. But what a way it was! There was so much stupidity, so much vice, so
much folly, so much disgust and disappointment and misery that I had to go
through before simply becoming a child again and to be able to start anew.
But it was the right way, my heart tells me yes, my eyes laugh about it. I
had to experience doubt, I had to sink down to that most foolish of
thoughts, the thought of suicide, before I could experience mercy, before
I could hear Om again, before I could sleep properly again and before I
could wake properly again. I had to become a fool before I could find
Atman within myself again. I had to commit sin before I could live again.
Where will my path lead me from here? This is a foolish path, it goes
round in loops, perhaps it goes round in circles. Whichever way it chooses
to go, I will follow it.

In his breast he felt a surge of wonderful joy.

Where from then, he asked his heart, where from do you have this gaiety?
Could it be that it comes from that long and wholesome sleep that did me
so much good? Or from the word Om that I spoke? Or could it be because I
have escaped, that my flight is completed, that I am at last free again
and stand once more under the sky as a child? I have escaped, I have
become free, and it is so good! How pure and lovely the air is here, how
good to breathe it! There, the place whence I escaped, everything smelt of
ointment, of spices, of wine, of excess, of lethargy. How I hated this
world of the rich, of the world of luxury, the world of gamblers! How I
hated myself for staying so long in this dreadful world! How I hated
myself, robbed myself, poisoned and tortured myself, how I made myself old
and bad tempered! No, I will never again delude myself, as I so much used
to like doing, never again think that Siddhartha is a wise man! But this
is something it was right to do, this is something that pleases me, this
is something for which I should praise myself, that I have put an end to
this self-hatred, to this life of folly and barrenness! I praise you,
Siddhartha, after so many years of folly you have once again had an idea,
you have done something, you have heard the bird singing in your breast
and you have followed him!

Thus he praised himself, had pleasure in himself, listened with curiosity
to his stomach, which was rumbling with hunger. In the last few days, he
felt, he had tasted pain, he had tasted sorrow, he had tasted them
completely and thoroughly, he had eaten them totally to the point of doubt
and of death and then he had spat them out. It was good, so. He could have
remained much longer with Kamaswami, making money, wasting money, filling
his belly and letting his soul go thirsty, he could have lived much longer
in this soft, well-cushioned Hell if this had not happened: that moment of
perfect doubt and despair, that moment when he was at such an extreme that
he hung over the flowing water and was ready to destroy himself. He had
felt doubts and the deepest disgust but had not succumbed to them, the
bird within him that was his voice and his source of gaiety was still
living, and this filled him with joy, this brought him to laughter, this
made his face, under his grey hair, beam.

“It is good,” he thought, “to experience everything you need to know
yourself. I learned as a child that wealth and worldly pleasures are not
good. It is something that I have long known but only now experienced. And
now I know it, I know it not only in my thoughts but with my eyes, with my
heart, with my stomach. It is good for me that I know it!”

He thought long about his transformation, he listened to the bird as it
sang for joy. Had this bird within him not died, had he not felt its
death? No, it was something else within him that had died, something that
had long been yearning for death. Was it not this that in his earlier
years of fervent penitence he had wanted to kill off? Was it not his Self,
his petty, anxious and proud Self, that he had struggled against for so
many years that found victory over him again and again, that reappeared
each time he killed it off, each time he forbade himself pleasure, each
time he was afraid? Was it not this that today had finally found its
death, here in the woods by this lovely river? Was it not because of this
death that he was now like a child, so full of trust, so without fear, so
full of joy?

Siddhartha now also began to understand why his efforts against this Self
were in vain when he was a brahmin, when he was a penitent. He had been
hindered by too much knowledge, too much of the holy verses, too many
rules of sacrifice, too much castigation, too much doing and too much
striving! He had been full of pride, he had been always the cleverest,
always the keenest, always one step ahead of the others, always the one
who knew, the one who was spiritual, always the priest or the wise man.
His Self had crept into this priesthood, into this pride, into this
spirituality, it sat firmly there and grew while Siddhartha thought he was
destroying it with fasting and penitence. Now he could see it, and he saw
that the secret voice had been right, that no teacher could ever have
removed this Self. That is why he had had to go out into the world, to
lose himself in fun and power and women and money, had had to be a
businessman, a gambler, a drinker and to be greedy, till the priest and
the samana within him were dead. That is why he had had to continue to
endure these years of loathsomeness, to bear the disgust, the emptiness,
the meaninglessness, of a life that was lost and barren, right till the
end, till the bitter doubt, till Siddhartha the sybarite, Siddhartha the
greedy, was even ready to die. He did die, a new Siddhartha awoke from
that sleep. Even he would grow old, even he would have to die one day,
Siddhartha was impermanent, every form was impermanent. But today he was
young, he was a child, and the new Siddhartha was full of joy.

These were his thoughts, he listened with a smile to his stomach, listened
with gratitude to a buzzing bee. He looked happily into the river as it
flowed, water had never been to pleasing to him as this water, he had
never been so strongly aware of the beauty of water, of its voice, of what
it represents. The river seemed to have something special to say to him,
something he still did not know, something still waiting for him. This was
the river where Siddhartha had wanted to drown himself, this was the river
where the old, tired, doubting Siddhartha today had drowned. But the new
Siddhartha felt profound love for this rushing water and he promised
himself never again to be so rash in leaving it.


THE FERRYMAN

I would like to remain by this river, thought Siddhartha, it is the same
river that I once crossed on my way to the childlike people, that time I
was taken across by a friendly ferryman, I would like to go to him. It was
from his hut that my way once led out into a new life, a life which now
has become old and dead - I hope the way I am now on, the new life that I
have begun, take its starting point from there!

He looked tenderly into the flowing water, into that transparent green,
into the crystal lines of its drawing that was so full of secrets. He saw
pearls of light rising from its depths, peaceful bubbles of air floating
on its surface, the blue of the sky reflected there. With its thousand
eyes the river looked back at him, eyes of green, eyes of white, eyes of
crystal, eyes of Heavenly blue. How he loved this water, how it delighted
him, how he was grateful to it! In his heart he heard the newly-woken
voice speak, and it said to him, “Love this water! Stay beside it! Learn
from it!” Oh yes, he did want to learn from it, he did want to listen to
it. Whoever understood this water and its secrets, it seemed to him, would
also have understanding of many other things, many secrets, all secrets.

Of the river’s secrets, however, he saw today just one, and it was
understood by his soul. He saw: this water flowed and flowed, it never
ceased to flow but was nonetheless always there, it was always and for all
time the same, yet each glance at it showed something new! Whoever could
grasp this would understand it! He understood but could not grasp it, he
felt no more than the rising of some vague notion, a distant memory,
voices of gods.

Siddhartha stood up, for the power of hunger in his body was becoming
unbearable. He walked on not caring whither he went, he followed the path
along the river bank as it led him upstream, he listened to its flow,
listened to growling hunger in his body.

When he reached the place where the ferry made its crossings he found the
boat lying ready and standing in it was the same ferryman who had once
taken the young samana across. Siddhartha recognised him, though he too
was greatly altered.

“Would you like to take me across?” he asked.

The ferryman, astonished to see such an elegant man travelling alone and
on foot, accepted him into the boat and pushed off from the bank.

“You have chosen a nice life for yourself,” said the passenger. “It
must be nice to have a life beside this water every day and to travel on
it.”

“It is very nice, sir,” said the oarsman, smiling as he rowed, “just
as you say. But is not every life nice, is not every job a good job?”

“You could well be right. But I still envy you your job.”

“Oh, you would soon become tired of it. It is not a job for a gentleman
in fine clothes.”

Siddhartha laughed. “This is not the first time today that I have been
judged by the clothes I wear, judged and mistrusted. Ferryman, would you
not like to take these clothes from me? They have become burdensome to me.
And I think you already know I have no money to pay your fare.”

“The gentleman is joking with me,” the ferryman laughed.

“I am not joking, my friend. Listen, you have once before carried me
across the water in your boat and you did it for the love of God. Do the
same today, and accept my clothes in return.”

“Does the gentleman mean to continue his journey without clothes?”

“Oh, most of all I would like not to continue my journey at all. Most of
all, ferryman, I would like you to give me an old loincloth and take me on
as your assistant, or rather as your apprentice, for I would need first to
learn how to handle the boat.”

The ferryman stared long and quizzically at the stranger.

“Now I recognise you,” he said at last. “You slept in my hut once,
that was long ago, it must be more than twenty years, you were taken over
the river by me and we took leave of each other as good friends. Were you
not a samana? I can’t think what your name is any more.”

“My name is Siddhartha, and I was a samana the last time you saw me.”

“Welcome, Siddhartha. My name is Vasudeva. I hope you will again be my
guest today and sleep in my hut and tell me all about where you have come
from and why your fine clothes are such a burden to you.”

They had reached the middle of the river and Vasudeva pulled harder on the
oars in order to overcome the current. He worked quietly with his powerful
arms and with his eye on the bow. Siddhartha sat and watched him and
remembered how, once before, in the last days of his time as a samana,
love for this man had arisen in his heart. He accepted Vasudeva’s
invitation with gratitude. When they reached the bank Siddhartha helped
him to tether the boat and the ferryman invited him into the hut where he
offered him bread and water, and Siddhartha ate hungrily, and he ate
hungrily of the mangoes that Vasudeva offered him.

The sun had begun to set, and they went to sit on a tree trunk at the side
of the river where Siddhartha told the ferryman about where he was from
and what his life had been, about how he had seen it before his eyes that
day in his moment of doubt. His story continued late into the night.

Vasudeva listened with great attention. He took in all that he heard, his
origin and childhood, all that learning, all that seeking, all that joy,
all that suffering. This was one of the ferryman’s greatest virtues: few
knew how to listen as well as he. Vasudeva would not say a word, but the
speaker would sense how he allowed the words to enter into him, quiet,
open, patient, never losing a word, never waiting impatiently for a word,
never offering praise nor censure, simply listening. Siddhartha was aware
of what good fortune it was to have the company of a listener such as
this, one into whose heart he could sink his own life, his own searchings,
his own sorrows.

As Siddhartha neared the end of his story, though, as he spoke of the tree
at the riverside and of the depth of his fall, of the holy Om and of how
he felt such love for the river when he woke from his sleep, then the
ferryman listened with twice as much attention, totally devoted to it with
his eyes shut.

But when Siddhartha became silent and there was a long period of
stillness, Vasudeva said, “It is just as I thought. The river spoke to
you. He is the friend of you also, he speaks to you also. That is good,
that is very good. Stay with me, Siddhartha my friend. I had a wife once,
her place was next to mine, but it is long since she died, I have lived
long alone. Now you live with me, there is room here and there is food
here for both of us.”

“I thank you,” said Siddhartha, “I thank you and I accept. And I
also thank you, Vasudeva, for being such a good listener! There are few
people who know how to listen. And I have never come across anyone who
could do it as well as you. This is something else that I shall be
learning from you.”

“You will learn,” said Vasudeva, “but not from me. It is the river
that taught me how to listen, and he will teach you too. He knows
everything, the river, there is nothing you cannot learn from him. Look,
this is something else that you have already learned from the river, that
it is good to strive to go down, to sink, to seek out the depths. The rich
and courtly Siddhartha will become an apprentice oarsman, the learned
brahmin Siddhartha will become a ferryman: this is something else that the
river has told you. And there is more that you will learn from him.”

There was a long pause, and Siddhartha said, “What more, Vasudeva?”

Vasudeva stood up. “It is getting late,” he said, “let us go to bed.
I cannot tell you what more, my friend. You will learn, perhaps you even
know it already. I am not a learned man, you see, I do not know how to
give speeches, I do not know how to think. All I know how to do is
listening and saying my prayers, there is nothing else I have learned how
to do. If I could explain it to you and give lessons then that might mean
I am a wise man, but as it is I am just a ferryman and it is my job to
take people across this river. It could have been thousands that I have
taken across and all that my river has ever been to them is something that
has gotten in the way on their journey. They have been travelling for the
sake of money or business, going to weddings, going on a pilgrimage, and
the river was in their way and the ferryman was there so that they could
get past that thing in their way as soon as possible. Some of those
thousands though, some of them, though not many, four or five of them, for
some of them the river stopped being just something in their way, they
heard his voice, they listened to him, and the river became something holy
for them, just like he has for me. Now let us go and take our rest,
Siddhartha.”

Siddhartha remained with the ferryman and learned how to operate the boat,
and when there was no ferry work to do he would work with Vasudeva in the
rice field, gathering wood, picking the fruits of the plantain trees. He
learned how to make an oar and how to repair the boat, he learned how to
weave a basket and he was happy at all that he had learned and the days
and the months passed quickly. The river, though, taught him more than
Vasudeva was able to. He learned from it without cease. Most of all he
learned from the river how to listen, to pay attention with a quiet heart,
with a patient and open soul, without passion, without desire, without
judgement, without opinion.

He lived in friendly proximity with Vasudeva, and they would now and then
exchange a few words, a few words which had long been considered. Vasudeva
was not a friend of words, it was rare for Siddhartha to move him to
speak.

“Have you,” he once asked him, “have you also learned from the river
the secret that there is no time?”|

A bright smile spread over Vasudeva’s face.

“Yes, Siddhartha,” he said. “Is this what you are saying: that the
river is the same along his whole length, at his source and at his
estuary, at the waterfall, at the ferry crossing, at the rapids, at the
sea, in the mountains, everywhere the same, and that for him there is only
the present, no shadow of the future?”

“Yes, that is right,” said Siddhartha. “And when I had learned this
I looked at my life and saw that it too was a river, and separating the
boy Siddhartha from the man Siddhartha, and the man Siddhartha from the
old man Siddhartha, there was merely a shadow, nothing real. And
Siddhartha’s previous births too were not in the past, and his death and
his return to Brahma were not in the future. Nothing has been and nothing
will be; everything is, everything has its essence and its presence.”

Siddhartha spoke with delight, this elucidation had made him deeply happy.
For was not, then, all suffering time, was not all self-torture and
self-fear time, was not all difficulty, all hostility in the world
expunged and overcome as soon a time has been overcome, as soon as time
could be removed from our thoughts? He spoke with gleeful passion, but
Vasudeva simple gave him a bright smile and nodded agreement, he nodded in
silence, touched Siddhartha’s shoulder and went back to his work.

Another time in the rainy season, and the swollen river made a mighty
roar, Siddhartha said, “Would you say, my friend, that the river has
many voices, very many voices? Does he not have the voice of a king, and
of a warrior, and of a bull, and of a bird at night, and of a mother
giving birth, and of a man who sighs and a thousand other voices?”

“You are right,” Vasudeva nodded, “all the voices in creation are in
his voice.”

“And do you know,” Siddhartha, “what word he says when you succeed
in hearing all ten thousand voices at once?”

Happy laughter appeared on Vasudeva’s face, he leant towards Siddhartha
and into his ear he spoke the holy word Om. And this indeed was what
Siddhartha also had heard.

And little by little his smile became like the ferryman’s, became nearly
as beaming, nearly as permeated with happiness, just as radiant from a
thousand tiny wrinkles, just as child-like, just as mature. Many
travellers who saw the two ferrymen thought they must be brothers. In the
evenings they would often sit together on the tree trunk at the riverside,
they would say nothing but both would listen to the water which, for them,
was not water but the voice of life, the voice of existence, of eternal
becoming. Sometimes, as the two of them listened to the river together,
they would both think of the same things, of a discussion that had taken
place two days earlier, of one of the travellers whose face and whose
destiny occupied them, of death, of their childhood. Sometimes, when the
river had said something good to them, they would each look at the other
at the same moment, both thinking the same thing, both feeling the same
joy at hearing the same answer to the same question.

Many of the travellers felt there was something given out from the ferry
and the two ferrymen. Sometimes a traveller would look into the face of
one of the ferrymen and begin to tell his life story, would tell of his
sorrows, acknowledge where he had done wrong, ask for solace and advice.
Sometimes one of them would ask permission to spend the evening with them
to listen to the river. Sometimes someone would come to them because he
was curious, someone who had heard about these two wise men or magicians
or holy men who lived beside this ferry. They would ask many questions but
received no answers, and they found neither magicians nor wise men, all
they found were two elderly and friendly little men who seemed unable to
speak and, in some special way, demented. They would laugh, and tell their
friends about how foolish and credulous those people were who spread such
empty rumours.

The years went by and nobody counted them. One time there came monks on a
pilgrimage, disciples of Gotama, the buddha, and they asked the ferrymen
to take them across the river, and the ferrymen learned that they were
hurrying back to their great teacher because word was spreading that the
noble one was mortally ill and must soon suffer his last death as a human
before going to his release. Not long after came a new flux of monks on
pilgrimage, and then another, and not only the monks but most of the other
travellers and wanderers spoke of nothing but Gotama and his impending
death. There was a flow of people here from all parts as if they had been
an army on campaign or were going to attend the coronation of a king, they
collected like ants, they flowed as if drawn by some kind of magic on
their way to where the great buddha lay awaiting death, to the place where
that awful event would take place and the great perfect one of an era
would rise to majesty.

At this time Siddhartha thought a great deal about the wise man as he was
dying, about the great teacher whose voice had admonished and who had
brought hundreds of thousands to an awakening, whose voice he too had
learned from and whose holy face he too had once looked on with
veneration. He thought of him with kindness, saw his way to perfection
before his eyes and, with a smile, thought of the words which he once, as
a young man, had put to him, the noble one. Those words now seemed proud
and arrogant to him, and he remembered them with a smile. He had long
known that there was nothing that made him different from Gotama, though
he was not able to accept his teachings. No, a true seeker would never be
able to accept any teachings, not if he truly wanted to find what he
sought. But he who has found what he sought would find goodness in any
teachings at all, any path, any objective, he would be in no way different
from the thousands of others who lived in eternity, who breathed in the
breath of the divine.

One of those days, when there were so many making pilgrimage to the dying
buddha, Kamala, who had once been the most beautiful of the courtesans,
also made pilgrimage to him. She had long since withdrawn from her earlier
way of life, had given her garden to Gotama’s monks, had sought refuge
in his teachings, was one of the friends and benefactors of pilgrims.
Together with her son, Siddhartha, she had heard news of Gotama’s
impending death and set out, on foot and in simple clothes, on her way to
him. She was on her way with her little son along the river: but the lad
soon became tired, he wanted to go back home, he wanted to rest, he wanted
something to eat, he became difficult and whining.

Kamala was frequently obliged to rest with him, he was used to imposing
his will on her, she had to feed him, had to comfort him, had to
discipline him. The boy was unable to understand why he had to go on this
sad and arduous pilgrimage with his mother, to go to a place he did not
know about, to go to a strange man who was something holy and who lay
dying. So let him die! Why should it matter to him?

The pilgrims were not far from Vasudeva’s ferry when young Siddhartha
once more insisted he and his mother should stop and rest. Kamala, too,
was tired and while the lad munched on a banana she sank to the ground
and, with eyes half closed, rested. Suddenly though, she gave out a
piercing scream, the boy looked at her in shock and saw her face pale with
horror as out from her dress emerged a small black snake which had just
bitten her.

The two of them now ran along the path to reach people as soon as they
could and were near the ferry crossing when Kamala collapsed, unable to go
any further. But the lad raised a pitiful cry as he kissed and embraced
his mother, who added her own voice to the boy’s loud calls for help.
The sound reached the ears of Vasudeva as he stood by the ferry and he
hurried to Kamala and her son. He took the woman by the arm and carried
her into the boat, the boy also ran in, and they were all soon in the hut
where Siddhartha stood at the stove, lighting the fire. He looked up and
saw, first of all, the face of the boy which reminded him, in a way that
was both wonderful and reproachful, of something he had forgotten. Then he
saw Kamala. He recognised her immediately even though she lay unconscious
in the arms of the ferryman, and now he realised that it was the face of
his own son that had so reproached him, and his heart moved within his
breast.

Kamala’s wound was washed, but was already black and her body was
swollen, a healing drink was poured into her. Consciousness returned to
her as she lay on Siddhartha’s bed in the hut, Siddhartha leant over
her, he who had once had such earnest love for her. She thought she was
dreaming, and, with a smile, looked into the face of her friend, slowly
began to realise where she was, remembered the snake bite, and called out
anxiously for the boy.

“He is with you. You need not worry,” said Siddhartha.

Kamala looked into his eyes. She spoke with a heavy tongue, made clumsy by
the venom. “You have grown old, my love,” she said, “you have gone
grey. But you are just like the young samana who once came to me in the
garden with no clothes and with dusty feet. You are much more like him
than you were then for you have gone away from me and Kamaswami. In your
eyes you are just like him, Siddhartha. Oh, I too have grown old, old -
did you still recognise me?”

Siddhartha smiled. “I recognised you immediately, Kamala, my love.”

Kamala pointed to her boy and said, “Did you recognise him, too? He is
your son.”

Her eyes became erratic and fell shut. The boy wept, Siddhartha took him
on his knee, let him cry, stroked his hair and, as he looked at the
child’s face, a brahmanic prayer that he had once learned came to his
mind, one that he had learned when he himself was a lad. Slowly, with
melodic voice, he began to say it, the words flowed into him from the
past, from his childhood. Affected by his sing-song the boy became quiet,
sobbed now and then, and then fell asleep. Siddhartha put him down on
Vasudeva’s bed. Vasudeva stood at the stove cooking rice. Siddhartha
threw him a glance which he returned with a smile.

“She’s dying,” said Siddhartha quietly.

Vasudeva nodded, the light of the fire in the stove ran over his friendly
face.

Kamala became conscious once again. Her face was twisted with pain,
Siddhartha’s eye could read the pain on her mouth, on her pale cheeks.
He read it in silence, watching, waiting, immersed in her suffering.
Kamala felt it, her eyes sought his.

Looking at him, she said, “I can see, now, that your eyes have changed.
They have become quite different. How is it that I can still see that you
are Siddhartha? You are Siddhartha, yet you are not.”

Siddhartha said nothing, his eyes looked into hers in silence.

“Have you achieved it?” she asked. “Have you found peace?”

He smiled, and laid his hand on hers.

“I can see it,” she said, “I can see it. I will find peace too.”

“You have found peace,” said Siddhartha in a whisper.

Kamala looked steadily into his eyes. She thought of how she had intended
to make pilgrimage to Gotama in order to see the face of a perfect one, in
order to breathe in his peace, and now instead of finding Gotama she had
found Siddhartha, and it was good so, just as good as if she had seen
Gotama. She wanted to tell him so, but her tongue would no longer do as
she wished. She looked at him in silence, and he saw in her eyes how her
life was fading. When her final pain filled her eyes, when the final
shudder ran through her limbs, he put his finger to her eyelids and closed
them.

He sat there long, looking at her now lifeless face. He looked long at her
mouth, her aged tired mouth with its lips, that now had become thin, and
he remembered how once, in the springtime of his years, how he had once
compared this mouth with a freshly opened fig. He sat there long, studied
that pale face, those tired creases, filled himself with what he saw
there, saw his own face lying in the same way, just as white, just as
extinguished, simultaneously saw his own face and hers with its red lips,
its burning eyes, and the sense of the present and of simultaneity
permeated his being, the sense of eternity. He felt it deeply, more deeply
than he had ever felt it before, now in that moment of the immortality of
every life, the eternity of every glance.

When he raised himself Vasudeva had prepared rice for him. But Siddhartha
did not eat. In the stall where they kept their goat the two old men
prepared a beds of straw for themselves, and Vasudeva lay down to sleep.
Siddhartha, though, went outside and spent the night sitting in front of
the hut, listening to the river, the past flowing over him, all the ages
of his life at the same time touching him and embracing him. From time to
time, though, he would raise himself, go to the door of the hut and listen
to find out whether the boy was sleeping.

Early in the morning, even before the sun had become visible, Vasudeva
came out of the stall and went to his friend.

“You have not slept,” he said.

“No, Vasudeva. I sat here listening to the river. He told me much, he
filled me deeply with the healing thought, the thought of unity.”

“You have gone through pain, Siddhartha, but I can see that there is no
sadness that has entered your heart.”

“No, my friend, what do I have to be sad about? I used to be rich and
happy, and now I have become even richer and happier. I have received the
gift of a son.”

“Your son is also welcome. But now, Siddhartha, let us go to work, there
is much to be done. Kamala died on the same bed as my wife did, long ago.
Let us make her pyre on the same hill where I made hers.”

They built her pyre while the boy still slept.


THE SON

At his mother’s funeral the boy was shy and tearful, Siddhartha greeted
him as his son and told him he was welcome in Vasudeva’s hut and he was
shy and gloomy as he listened. With pale face he sat all day on the hill
of the dead, refused to eat, refused to look, refused to open his heart,
struggled to defend himself against fate.

Siddhartha had respect for his grief and did nothing to change his
behaviour. He understood that his son did not know him and could not love
him as a father. Slowly, he also saw and understood that the eleven year
old was spoilt, a mummy’s boy, as he grew he had become used to riches
and fancy food, to a soft bed and to giving orders to servants. Siddhartha
understood that, spoilt and grieving as the boy was, he would not become
content with poverty in a strange place either quickly or with good grace.
He did not force him, he did many jobs for him, always found the daintiest
food for him. He hoped he could slowly win him over by friendliness and
patience.

He had counted himself rich and happy when the lad came to him. But time
flowed by and the boy continued to be alien and gloomy, he showed a heart
that was proud and truculent, wanted to do no work, showed no respect for
his elders, robbed Vasudeva of the fruit on his trees, and so Siddhartha
began to understand that it was not peace and happiness that the boy had
brought with him but sorrow and worries. But Siddhartha loved him, and he
preferred the sorrow and worries of love over the happiness he had enjoyed
without the boy. Since the young Siddhartha had been in the hut the two
old men had taken on separate tasks. Vasudeva had once more taken on the
office of ferryman by himself and, in order to be with his son, it was
Siddhartha who did the work in the hut and the fields.

Siddhartha waited long, through many months, for his son to understand
him, for him to accept his love, for him perhaps to return it. Vasudeva
waited long, while he watched and waited and said nothing. One day though,
when the lad had again made his father suffer with his disobedience and
bad humour and had broken both rice dishes, Vasudeva took his friend aside
when evening had come and spoke to him.

“Please forgive me,” he said, “if I say something to you, as I do so
with a friendly heart. I see that you are suffering, I see that you are
worrying. Your son, my friend, is causing you worries and he is causing me
worries too.”

“He is used to a different life, he is a young bird used to a different
nest. He did not run away from wealth and the city in weary disgust as you
did, he was made to leave all this behind him against his will. I have
asked the river, my friend, I have asked him many times. But the river
laughs at me, he laughs at both of us and shakes his head at our folly.
Water will be water, boys will be boys, your son is not in a place where
he can flourish. You too should ask the river, you too should listen to
what he says!”

Siddhartha looked anxiously at the friendly face which showed, in the many
wrinkles it bore, that it was the home of constant cheerfulness.

“Do you think, then, that I would be able to separate myself from
him?” he said gently, with some shame. “Allow me some time, my friend!
Look, I am struggling for him, I am trying to win his heart, I am trying
to gain it with love and with friendly patience. And one day the river
will speak also to him, he also has a calling.”

Vasudeva’s smile became warmer. “Oh yes, he also has a calling, he
also is part of the eternal life. But do we know, you and I, what it is
that he is called to, what path, what acts, what sufferings? His
sufferings will not be light, he has a heart that is proud and hard, such
as he must suffer greatly, make many mistakes, commit many injustices,
burden themselves with many sins. Tell me, my friend; are you not bringing
your son up? Do you not compel him to do what he does not want to do? Do
you not strike him? Do you not punish him?”

“No, Vasudeva, I do not do any of those things.”

“I knew it. You do not compel him, you do not strike him, you give him
no orders, because you know that softness is stronger than hardness, water
stronger than stone, love stronger than violence. That is very good, and I
praise you for it. But are you not mistaken in thinking you should not
compel him, should not punish him? Do you not bind him in the bondage of
your love? Do you not shame him every day, making it more difficult for
him with your goodness and patience? Do you not compel this arrogant and
spoilt child to live in a hut with a pair of aged banana eaters for whom
even rice is a luxury, whose thoughts cannot ever be his thoughts, whose
heart is old and quiet and who are following a different path from his? Is
all of this not a compulsion on him, not a punishment?”

Siddhartha saw that Vasudeva was right and looked down at the ground.
Gently he asked him, “What is it you think I should do?”

Vasudeva said, “Take him to the city, take him to his mother’s house,
the servants will still be there, give him over to them. And if there are
no servants still there then take him to a teacher, not for the sake of
being taught but so that he can have the company of other boys, and of
girls, take him into the world which is his world. Have you never thought
of that?”

“You have seen into my heart,” said Siddhartha sadly. “I have often
thought of doing that. But listen, how should I put him into this world
when he does not have a gentle heart as it is? Will he not become
extravagant, will he not lose himself in the pursuit of fun and of power,
will he not repeat all the errors of his father, might he not become
totally lost in sansara?”

The ferryman’s smile shone brightly; he gently touched Siddhartha’s
arm and said, “Ask the river about it, my friend! Listen to him laughing
about it! Do you really think that you have gone through these follies of
yours so that your son would not have to? And can you protect your son
from sansara? How? By teaching, by prayer, by admonishment? Dear friend,
have you entirely forgotten that story, that story of the well educated
brahmin’s son, Siddhartha, that you once told me once on this very spot?
Who was it who held Siddhartha the samana back from sansara, from sin,
from greed, from folly? The piety of his father, his teachings and his
warnings, his own wisdom and his own seekings, were these things able to
keep Siddhartha safe? What father, what teacher has been able to protect
him from living his own life, from soiling himself with the dirt of life,
from taking guilt onto himself, from taking the bitter drink himself, from
having to find his path for himself?

“Do you really think, my friend, that there is anyone who is spared this
path? Do you think your young son might be spared sorrow and pain and
disappointed because you love him and you want to save him from those
things? You could die for him ten times over, but you still would not take
even the tiniest part of his destiny onto yourself.”

Vasudeva had never spoken so many words before. Siddhartha gave him his
friendly thanks, then, feeling anxious, he went into the hut, but was long
unable to sleep. Vasudeva had said nothing to him that he had not already
thought and known. But it was knowledge that he could not implement, his
love for the lad was stronger than that knowledge, his affection was
stronger, the fear of losing him was stronger. Had he ever before lost his
heart for anything so completely, had he ever loved anyone this much, so
blindly, so passionately, so hopelessly and yet so happily?

Siddhartha was not able to follow his friend’s advice, his was not able
to give his son up. He allowed the boy to give him orders, he allowed him
to show him contempt. He remained silent and waited, every day he would
begin the wordless struggle for friendliness, the soundless war of
patience. Vasudeva, too, remained silent and waited, with friendship, with
understanding, with forbearance. Both of them were masters of patience.

One time, when the boy’s face reminded him especially of Kamala,
Siddhartha suddenly remembered something that Kamala, long before had said
to him when he was young; she had once said to him, “you are not capable
of love,” and he had conceded that she was right. He had been comparing
himself with a star, while comparing the childlike people with falling
leaves, but he had nonetheless felt an accusation in every word. It was
true that he had never been able to entirely lose himself in another
person and devote himself to them till he forgot himself, had never
undergone the folly of love for another; he had never been capable of it,
and it had seemed to him then that that was the great difference that
divided him from the childlike people. But now, since his son had been
there, even he, Siddhartha, had become entirely childlike, feeling sorrow
for someone, feeling love for someone, losing himself in love, becoming a
fool for love. It was late, but now even he felt for once in his life this
strongest and oddest of passions, suffered for it, suffered grievously but
was nonetheless blessed, nonetheless somewhat rejuvenated, somewhat
wealthier.

He was well aware that this love, this blind love for his son, was a
passion, something very human, aware that it was sansara, a cloudy source,
a dark water. But he felt at the same time that it was not without value,
that it was something necessary, that it sprang from its own essence. Even
this craving had to be paid for, even these pains had to be tasted, even
these follies had to be gone through.

During all this the son let him go through these follies, let him try to
win him over, every day he would humiliate him with his moods. This father
of his had nothing that pleased him and nothing that he would be afraid
of. He was a good man, this father, a good, good-natured and gentle man,
perhaps a very pious man, perhaps a holy man - but none of these
characteristics were anything that could win the boy over. He found his
father boring, keeping him prisoner in this miserable hut of his, he was
boring, and every time he behaved badly he would respond with a smile,
respond to insults with friendliness, respond to malice with goodness.
This was probably the trick of the old creep that he hated most. The boy
would rather have had him threaten him and mistreat him.

The day came when the young Siddhartha felt it was time to break out, and
he turned against his father quite openly. Siddhartha had given him the
task of collecting firewood, but the boy did not leave the hut, he stood
there in angry defiance, stamped his foot, clenched his fists and burst
out in a fit, screaming hatred and contempt in his father’s face.

“Get the firewood yourself!” he shouted, frothing at the mouth,
“I’m not your servant. I’m well aware you never hit me, ‘cause you
don’t dare to; I’m well aware you want to punish me a make me small
with your God-fearingness and your softness. You want me to be just like
you, all pious and all gentle and all full of wisdom! But listen! I’m
going to make you sorry, I’d rather be a bandit on the roads, rather be
a murderer and go to Hell than be like you! I hate you, you’re not my
father even if you’d been my mother’s lover ten times over!”

He gushed over with anger and self-pity, spat a hundred vapid and spiteful
words out at his father. Then the boy ran off and did not come back until
late in the evening.

But by the following morning he had disappeared. The little basket, woven
of fibres in two colours in which the ferrymen kept all the copper or
silvers coins they received as passengers’ fares, was also missing. Also
their boat was missing, which Siddhartha saw lying at the other side of
river. The boy had run away.

“I will have to go after him,” said Siddhartha, who was still shaken
from the previous day’s tirade by the boy. “A child cannot go through
the forest by himself. He will be killed. We need to build a raft,
Vasudeva, to get across the water.”

“We will build a raft,” said Vasudeva, “to fetch back our boat that
the lad took away. But you should let him go, my friend, he is not a child
any more, he knows how to look after himself. He is looking for the way to
the city, and he is right, do not forget that. He is doing what you have
failed to do yourself. He is looking after himself, he is following his
own path. Oh Siddhartha, I can see that you are suffering, but the pains
you are suffering are pains that could be laughed about, pains that you
too will soon laugh about.”

Siddhartha gave no answer. He already held the chopper in his hand and had
begun to build the raft from bamboo wood. Vasudeva helped him to tie them
together with rope made of grass. Then they made the crossing, were
carried far off course and, on the opposite shore, pulled the raft back
upstream.

“Why have you brought the chopper with you?” asked Siddhartha.

Vasudeva answered, “It could be that the rudder of our boat will be
missing.”

But Siddhartha knew what his friend was thinking. He was thinking that the
boy will have thrown the rudder away or smashed it in order to take his
revenge and to make it harder to follow him. And the rudder was indeed no
longer in the boat. Vasudeva pointed to the floor of the boat and looked
at his friend with a smile, as if he meant to say, “Do you not see what
it is that your son wants to tell you? Do you not see that he does not
want to be pursued?” He did not, however, say this in words. He set
about making a new rudder, but Siddhartha took his leave and went to
search for the fugitive. Vasudeva did nothing to stop him.

Siddhartha had long been making his way through the forest before it
occurred to him that his search was pointless. On the one hand, he
thought, the boy might be a long way ahead of him and had already reached
the city or, on the other, if he was still on his journey he would hide
himself from his pursuer. He continued to think about this, and he found
that he was not himself worried about his son for, deep within himself, he
knew he had neither been killed nor faced any danger in the woods.
Siddhartha nonetheless hurried on without rest, no longer in order to save
his son but just because there was something he wanted, just in order to
have the chance of seeing him again. He continued to hurry forward until
he was at the outskirts of the city.

Near by the city, on the broad highway, he reached the entrance to the
beautiful pleasure garden which had once belonged to Kamala, where he had
seen her for the first time carried on her litter, and there he stopped.
The memory rose up in his soul and he once more saw himself standing
there, a young and naked samana, bearded and with hair full of dust.
Siddhartha stood there long, looking in through the open gate into the
garden where monks in yellow robes walked about under the beautiful trees.

He stood there long, thinking, seeing pictures, listening to the story of
his life. He stood there long, watching the monks, and instead of seeing
them he saw the young Siddhartha, saw the young Kamala as she moved about
under the lofty trees. He saw himself clearly, how Kamala made him her
guest, how he accepted her first kiss, the pride and contempt he felt as
he looked back on his life as a brahmin, the pride and greed with which he
began his secular life. He saw Kamaswami, saw the servants, saw the wild
parties, the gamblers with their dice, the musicians, he saw Kamala’s
songbird in its cage, he lived through all this once again, he breathed
sansara, he was once again old and tired, felt once again the wish to
extinguish himself, was healed once again by the holy Om.

He stood long at the gateway into the garden until he saw that it was a
foolish wish that had driven him to this place, that he was unable to help
his son, that he should not stay too attached to him. He felt his love for
the fugitive deep in his heart, like a wound, and at the same time he saw
that the wound had not been given to him for him to dig at it, but that it
would blossom and had to shine.

It made him sad that by this time the wound still had not blossomed, still
did not shine. Instead of having an objective for his wishes, the
objective that had drawn him to this place in pursuit of his runaway son,
he now had nothing. Disheartened, he sat down, felt something die within
his heart, felt the emptiness, saw nothing to bring him joy, nothing to be
his objective. He sat there deep in thought and waited. This was what he
had learned at the riverside, just this: to wait, to be patient, to
listen. And he sat and listened, in the dust of the road, he listened to
his sad and tired heart, he waited for a voice. He remained there for many
hours, crouched and listening, he saw no more pictures, he sank into
emptiness, allowed himself to sink, and saw no path to follow. And when he
felt the wound burning he would silently utter Om, would fill himself with
Om. The monks in the garden saw him, for he crouched there for many hours,
and on his grey hair the dust accumulated, one of them came to him and put
two bananas down in front of him. The old man did not see him.

He was woken from this stupor by a hand shaking his shoulder. He
recognised this gentle and tentative movement straight away, and came out
of his state. He stood up and greeted Vasudeva who had come after him. And
as he looked into Vasudeva’s friendly face, into those cheerful little
eyes surrounded by many laughter wrinkles, he smiled too. Now he saw the
bananas lying in front of him, lifted them up, gave one to the ferryman
and ate the other one himself. Then he and Vasudeva went in silence back
into the wood and back to their home at the ferry point. Neither spoke of
what had happened that day, neither spoke the name of the lad, neither
spoke of his flight, neither spoke of the wound. In the hut Siddhartha lay
down on his bed and a little while later, when Vasudeva came to him to
offer him a cup of coconut milk, he found he was already asleep.


OM

The wound continued to cause pain. Siddhartha had to take many travellers
across the river who had a son or a daughter with them, and there was not
one of them whom Siddhartha did not look on with envy, and he would think,
“There are so many, so many thousands, who have this noblest of
happiness - why do I not? Even evil people, even thieves and robbers have
children whom they love and who are loved by them, and I alone do not
have.” This was the simplicity of his thoughts at that time, so lacking
in understanding, so similar had he become to the child-like people.

He no longer looked on people in the way he had done, less clever, less
proud, but with more warmth, more curiosity, more concerned. When he
carried people who were normal - child-people, businessmen, soldiers,
women - these people did not seem as alien to him as they had done
previously: he understood them, he shared the life they led, a life which
was not directed by thoughts and insights but solely by drives and wishes,
he felt he was the same as they were. He was now near liberation, though
he still suffered from the wound which was still fresh. These people
seemed to him nonetheless to be his brothers, these childlike people, with
all their vanities, their greed and their ridiculousness, no longer seemed
ridiculous, they had become understandable, become deserving of love,
even, it seemed to him, become venerable. The blind love of a mother for
her child, the stupid blind pride of an over-proud father for his only
little son, the vanity of a young woman who has a blind wild wish for more
jewelry and for admiration in the eyes of men, all these drives, all this
childishness, all these simple drives and greeds which were so foolish but
so monstrously strong, strong for life, strong enough to make themselves
felt. For Siddhartha now, these drives and greeds were no longer childish,
he saw how they gave people life, he saw how people could achieve the
infinite, how they could go on journeys, wage war, bear infinite sorrows,
and he was able to love them for it, he saw life, he saw the living, he
saw the indestructible, he saw Brahman in all their sorrows and all their
actions. These people had a faith that was blind, blind was their strength
and their tenderness, and that made them deserving of both love and of
admiration. There was nothing they lacked, there was no way that the wise
man, the thinking man, was ahead of them except for one detail, one single
tiny detail: consciousness, conscious awareness of the unity of all life.
And Siddhartha was often in doubt as to whether he should value this
knowledge, these thoughts, so highly, whether he would not also like to be
as childlike as the thought-people the childlike thought-people. In all
other respects the people of the world were the equals of the wise, in
many respects far superior, just like animals that do what they have to do
with harshness and without error, animals that can seem at many times
superior to man.

The realisation, the knowledge of what wisdom actually is, and of what it
was that he had been seeking for so long, was slow to blossom, slow to
ripen in Siddhartha. It was nothing more than the readiness of the soul, a
capability, a secret talent, to think the thought of the one at every
moment, in the middle of life to feel the one, the ability to breathe the
one. This was slow to blossom in him, it shone on him back from the
child-like face of Vasudeva: harmony, knowledge of eternal perfection, the
world, a smile, the one.

The wound, however, still burned. Siddhartha yearned bitterly for his son,
he nurtured his love and tenderness in his heart, he allowed the pain to
consume him, he went through all the follies of love. This was a flame
that would not die away by itself.

One day, when the wound was burning fiercely, Siddhartha, impelled by the
yearning for his son, crossed the river, disembarked and wanted to go to
the city to seek him out. The river flowed with gentle smoothness, it was
the dry time of year, but his voice sounded odd: it was the voice of
laughter. It was clearly the voice of laughter. The river was laughing,
laughing brightly and clearly at the aged ferryman. Siddhartha stopped and
bent towards the water in order to hear it better, and in the smoothly
flowing water he saw the reflection of his own face, and this reflection
seemed to remind him of something, something forgotten, and as he thought
about it he found it: this face was the same as another face he had once
known and loved and feared. It was the same face as his father’s, the
face of the brahmin. And he remembered how, long ago as a young man, he
had forced his father to let him go and join the penitents, how he had
taken his leave of him, how he had left and never gone back. Had his
father not suffered the same grief as he now suffered for his own son? Was
his father not now long dead, dying alone without ever having seen his son
again? Would he not now have to expect the same fate for himself? Was it
not a comedy, something peculiar and stupid, this repetition, this running
round in circles that would lead only to his fate.

The river was laughing. It was true, everything came back to you that had
not been endured to the end and resolved, the same pains would be suffered
again and again. But Siddhartha got back into the boat and went back to
the hut, thinking of his father, thinking of his son, laughed at by the
river, in dispute with himself, inclined to doubt and no less inclined to
join in with the laughter at himself and at the whole world. But the wound
had still not matured into blossom, his heart still struggled against his
fate, there was still no merriment, no victory, shining from his
suffering. He nonetheless felt hope, and when he had arrived back at the
hut he felt a wish that he could not overcome to open himself to Vasudeva,
to show him all, him the master of listening, to tell him everything.

Vasudeva sat in the hut weaving a basket. He no longer went out on the
boat, his eyes were becoming weak, and not only his eyes; his arms and his
hands were becoming weak too. It was only his joy and the cheerful
benevolence shown in his face that remained unchanged and flourishing.

Siddhartha sat down by the old man and slowly began to speak. He told him
of things they had never before discussed, of his journey to the city, of
his burning wound, of his envy when he saw a happy father, of his
awareness of the folly of such wishes and his unsuccessful struggle
against them. He told him all, he was able to tell him all, even the most
painful, all could be said, all could be shown, all could he relate. He
displayed his wound to him, even told him of his attempt to flee that very
day, how he had crossed the river, fleeing like a child and wishing to
walk to the city, how the river had laughed at him.

He spoke long, Vasudeva listened with a quiet expression on his face,
Siddhartha felt that Vasudeva listened more closely than he ever had
before, he felt how his pain, his anxieties flowed over to him, how his
secret hopes flowed over to him, how he came across to meet him. To tell
this listener about his wounds was the same a bathing them in the river
till they became cool and became one with the river. As he continued to
speak, continued to acknowledge his faults, continued to make his
confession, Siddhartha felt more and more that this was no longer
Vasudeva, no longer a human being, that was listening to him, that
Vasudeva as he sat motionless and listening was drawing in his confession
like a tree draws up rainwater, that Vasudeva as he sat motionless was the
river himself, that he was God himself, that he was the eternal himself.
And as Siddhartha ceased thinking about himself and his wounds awareness
of Vasudeva’s changed nature took possession of him, the more he
received it and penetrated it, the less wonderful it became and he saw
that all was as it should be, all was natural, he saw that Vasudeva had
long been in this state, he had almost always been in this state, he saw
that only he had not quite understood this, he saw that he himself was
hardly separate from him. He perceived that he now saw the aged Vasudeva
in the way that people see the gods, and that this was not something that
could last; he began, in his heart, to take his leave of Vasudeva. And as
he saw these things he continued to speak.

When he had finally finished speaking Vasudeva raised his eyes, friendly
but grown somewhat weak, to Siddhartha. He said nothing, but in silence he
remained cheerful and shone his love, his understanding, and his wisdom
onto him. He took Siddhartha’s hand, led him out to their seat at the
riverside, sat down with him, and smiled down at the water.

“You heard him laughing,” he said. “But you did not hear everything.
Let us listen, you will hear more.”

They listened. The song of the river, sung in his many voices, was sweet.
Siddhartha looked into the water, pictures appeared to him in the water as
it flowed: his father appeared to him, alone and in mourning for his son;
he appeared to himself, alone and he, too, was bound in the fetters of
longing for his son; his son appeared to him, also alone, as the lad
hurried greedily along the burning road of his youthful desire. Each of
them was directed to his aim, each of them obsessed with his aim, each of
them suffering. The river sang with a voice of sorrow, with yearning it
sang, with yearning it flowed towards its aim, its voice was one of
lament.

Without speaking, Vasudeva looked at Siddhartha, and his look asked, “Do
you hear?” Siddhartha nodded.

“Hear better,” Vasudeva whispered.

Siddhartha strained to hear better. The image of his father, the image of
himself, the image of his son flowed in and out of each other, the image
of Kamala also appeared and flowed away, the image of Govinda and other
images appeared, flowed in and out of each other, each became a part of
the river, each of them, as a part of the river, strove to reach its aim,
yearning, greedy, suffering, and the voice of the river was full of
yearning, full of burning pain, full of insatiable desire. The river
strove to reach its aim, Siddhartha saw it rushing, the river that was
made up of him and of those who belonged to him and all the people he had
ever seen, all the waves and all the water rushed in sorrow to their aim,
to their many aims, to the waterfall, to the lake, to the rapids, to the
sea, and all the aims were achieved, and each one was followed by another,
and water became steam and rose up to the sky, it became rain and poured
from the sky, it became a spring, became a stream, became a river,
striving for the new, flowing into the new. But the voice of yearning had
changed. It could still be heard, full of sorrow, full of searching, but
other voices came to keep it company, voices of joy and of sorrow, good
voices and bad voices, laughing and mourning, a hundred voices, a thousand
voices.

Siddhartha listened. By now he was nothing but listener, engrossed in
listening, quite empty, sucking in, he felt he had now fully learned how
to listen. He had heard all these things many times before, all these
voices in the river, but today it sounded new. He could no longer
distinguish these countless voices, not the gay from the plangent, not the
childish from the manly, they all belonged together, lamentations of
yearning, laughter of the wise man, the shout of anger and the groans of
the dying, all was as one, all was interwoven and conjoined, interwoven in
a thousand places. And all of this together, all the voices, all the aims,
all the yearning, all the sorrows, all the joys, all the good and all the
bad, all of this together was the world. All of this together was the
events that happened, flowing like the river, all of this was the music of
life. And when Siddhartha listened carefully to this flow, to this river
with its thousand voices, when he listened not to the sorrow or the
laughter, when he bound his soul not with any one of those voices and went
into it with his Self, but when he heard everything, the whole, when he
perceived the unity of the whole, that was when the great song of a
thousand voices was made up of a single word, the word Om: Perfection.

Once more, Vasudeva’s glance asked, “Do you hear?”

Vasudeva’s smile shone brightly, all round Vasudeva’s face with all
its wrinkles there was a glow of brightness, just as, over and around all
the voices of the river, there was the Om. His smile shone brightly as he
looked at his friend, also now, on Siddhartha’s face, the same smile
began to glow brightly. His wounds blossomed, his sorrow glowed, his Self
had flowed into the unity.

It was at that moment that Siddhartha stopped struggling against his fate,
stopped suffering. On his face there blossomed the gaiety of knowledge
when there is no longer any will standing against it, the knowledge known
by liberation, the knowledge that is in agreement with the flow of events,
with the river of life with all its shared sorrows, with all its shared
joys, surrendering to the flow, belonging to the unity.

Vasudeva stood up from where he had been sitting on the bank of the river,
he looked in Siddhartha’s eyes and saw the gaiety of wisdom shining
there, he put his hand lightly in his careful and gentle way on
Siddhartha’s shoulder and he said, “I have been waiting for this
moment, my friend. Now that it has come let me take my leave of you. I
have been waiting long for this moment, long have I been Vasudeva the
ferryman. It is now enough. Farewell hut, farewell river, farewell
Siddhartha!”

Siddhartha bowed deeply to Vasudeva as he took his leave.

“I knew it,” he said gently. “Will you go into the woods?”

Vasudeva’s face shone, and he said, “I will go into the woods, I will
go into the unity.”

Still beaming he went on his way; Siddhartha watched him as he went. With
the deepest joy, with the deepest earnestness, he watched him as he went,
saw his steps full of contentment, saw his head as it shone, saw his shape
full of light.


GOVINDA

Govinda was spending a rest period with other monks in the pleasure garden
which the courtesan, Kamala, had given to the followers of Gotama. He
heard there about an aged ferryman who lived by a river about a day’s
journey away, and whom many regarded as a wise man. When Govinda resumed
his walking he chose to take the path to the ferry, curious to see who
this ferryman was. All through his life he had lived according to the
regimen of his order, and the younger monks regarded him with veneration
because of his age and his modesty, but there was still unrest in his
heart and a searching which had not been extinguished.

He arrived at the river and asked the old man to take him across. On the
other bank, as they stepped out of the boat, he said to the old man,
“You have been very good to us monks and pilgrims, and you have taken
many of us across the river. Could it be that you too, ferryman, are a
seeker of the right path?”

Siddhartha showed a smile in his aging eyes and said, “Do you call
yourself a seeker, venerable sir, when you are already advanced in years
and you wear the robes of a monk of Gotama?”

“Yes, I am old,” said Govinda, “but I have never stopped searching.
I never will stop searching, this seems to be my destiny. And it seems to
me that you, too, have been seeking. Would you like to say a word to me,
honoured one?”

“What might I want to say to you, venerable sir?” Siddhartha asked.
“Perhaps I should ask you if you are not seeking too hard. Or ask if it
is your seeking that prevents you from finding.”

“How do you mean that?” Govinda asked.

“When someone is seeking,” said Siddhartha, “it is very easy for his
eye to see nothing but the thing sought, that he is unable to find, unable
to receive into himself anything because he thinks only of that which he
seeks, because he has an objective, because he is obsessed with that
objective. Seeking means having an objective, but finding means being
free, being receptive, having no objective. It could be, venerable sir,
that you are indeed a seeker, for in your efforts to reach your objective
you fail to see many things that are close before your eyes.”

“I still do not quite understand,” Govinda asked, “how do you mean
that?”

Siddhartha said, “Once before, venerable sir, many years ago, you were
beside this river, and you found there a man who was sleeping, and you sat
down beside him to watch over him as he slept. But, Govinda, you did not
recognise this sleeper.”

Astonished as if bewitched, the monk looked into the ferryman’s eyes.

“You are Siddhartha?” he asked, in timid voice. “Again, I failed to
recognise you! Hearty greetings, Siddhartha, I am heartily glad to see you
again! You have changed so much, my friend - and now, you have become a
ferryman?”

Siddhartha gave a friendly laugh. “Yes, Govinda, a ferryman. There are
many who have to go through many changes, have to wear many different
clothes, and I am one of them, my friend. Welcome Govinda! Come and stay
the night in my hut.”

Govinda did stay the night in the hut and he slept in the place which had
formerly been Vasudeva’s bed. He had many questions to put to his
childhood friend, Siddhartha had to recount many episodes of his life to
him.

The following morning came and it was time for Govinda to resume his
wandering. Govinda said, with some hesitation, “Before I continue my
journey, Siddhartha, let me ask you one more thing. Do you have a
doctrine? Do you have a belief or a knowledge that you follow and which
helps you through life and to do the right thing?”

Siddhartha said, “My friend, you know that when I was a young man,
living with you and the other penitents in the woods, that I had already
begun to mistrust doctrines and their teachers, and so I turned my back on
them. I have not changed my view. I have nonetheless had many teachers
since that time. There was a beautiful courtesan who was my teacher for a
long time, and a rich businessman was my teacher, as well as several
gamblers. One time there was even a wandering disciple of the Buddha who
was my teacher; he was on pilgrimage but he sat beside me while I was
asleep in the woods. I learned from him too, and I am grateful to him too,
very grateful. But most of all, I have learned from the river here, and
from my predecessor, Vasudeva the ferryman. He was a very simple man,
Vasudeva, he was not a thinker but he knew the important things as well as
Gotama, he was a perfect man, he was a holy man.”

“I think you’re mocking me again, Siddhartha,” said Govinda. “I
believe you and I both know that you have never followed any teacher. But
even if you have never followed a teacher have you not had certain
thoughts, found certain kinds of knowledge yourself, knowledge which is
your own and which have helped you through life? If you would like to tell
me something of this it would bring joy to my heart.”

“Yes,” said Siddhartha, “there are some things that I have thought
from time to time, and some things that I have seen. There have been times
when, for one hour or for one day, I have felt there is knowledge within
me, just as it is possible to feel life in one’s heart. I have had many
such thoughts, but I would find it very hard to tell you about them.
Govinda, listen, here is one of the thoughts that I have found: wisdom
cannot be taught. If a wise man tries to teach wisdom it will always sound
like folly.”

“Are you joking now?” Govinda asked.

“I am not joking. I am saying what I have found. Knowledge can be
taught, but not wisdom. It can be found, it can be lived, it can be what
carries you, it can work wonders, but it cannot be spoken and it cannot be
taught. This is what I had already begun to suspect when I was young, this
is what drove me away from the teachers. I have found a thought, Govinda,
a thought that you will again suppose is folly or a joke, but it is the
best thought I have. It reads: For every truth, the opposite is equally
true! This means that a truth that is one-sided can only ever be spoken,
it is encased in words. All that is thought with thoughts and can be
spoken in words will be one-sided, all will be half, all will be lacking
in wholeness, in roundness, in unity. When the noble Gotama spoke of the
world in his teachings he had to divide it into sansara and nirvana, into
delusion and truth, into suffering and liberation. He who wishes to be a
teacher has no choice in the matter, there is no other path for him to
follow. The world itself, though, that which exists around us and within
us, is never one sided. It is never a person, never an act, never the
whole of sansara and never the whole of nirvana, and a person is never
entirely holy and never entirely sinful. It does seem so because we are
subjected to delusion and believe that time is something real. Time is not
real, Govinda, that is something I have experienced many times. And if
time is not real then the gap that seems to lie between the world and
eternity, between suffering and being blessed, between evil and good, is
also just delusion.”

“How do you mean that?” asked Govinda, with some anxiety.

“Listen, my friend, listen well. The sinner, such as me, such as you, is
a sinner, but he will one day become once more Brahma, he will one day
achieve nirvana, will become a buddha - but now think of this: this ‘one
day’ is delusion, it is only a comparison! The sinner is not on his way
to becoming a buddha, he is not engrossed in any kind of development, even
though it is not possible for our thought to imagine these things in any
other way. No, the prospective buddha is already within the sinner, now
and today, his future is all already there, within him, within you, within
everyone is that which will be, that which is possible, that which is the
hidden buddha to be honoured. The world, Govinda my friend, is not
imperfect, nor is it trapped on a weary road to perfection: no, it has
perfection in every glance of the eye, every sin contains mercy within it,
every little child has the old man within it, every suckling has death
within it, every dying man has eternal life within him. No man is able to
see how far he has progressed along his path by looking at others, within
the thief and within the gambler the buddha is waiting, within the brahmin
the thief is waiting. In deep meditation it is possible to remove time and
to see all that has been, all that is and all that will be in one moment,
and in that moment all is good, all is perfect, all is Brahman. That is
why it appears to me that all that is good, death appears to me as the
same as life, sin appears to me the same as holiness, wisdom appears to me
the same as folly, everything has to be thus, nothing needs anything more
than my agreement, more than my will, my loving involvement, and so, for
me, it is good, it can only advance me and can never harm me. I have
learned through experience that I needed to sin, body and soul, I needed
lust, I strove for more possessions, I was vain, and I needed only the
slightest doubt to teach me to give up struggling against these things, to
learn to love the world, to stop comparing it with any kind of imaginary
world I might have wished for or any kind of perfection I might have
invented, I learned to leave the world as it is and to love it and to
enjoy being a part of it. These, Govinda, are some of the thoughts that
have come into my mind.”

Siddhartha reached down and picked up a stone from the ground, then he
weighed it in his hand. “This,” he said playfully, “is a stone, and
after a certain time it might become soil, and then the soil might become
a plant or an animal or a person. But earlier I would have said: this
stone is just a stone, it is worthless, it belongs to the world of maya;
but through the circle of metamorphoses it might become a person or a
spirit, and that is why I attribute value to it. That is what I might have
thought earlier. But now I think: this stone is a stone, it is also an
animal, it is also a god, it is also a buddha, I do not venerate it, I do
not love it because it might one day become this or that but because it
has always been everything and always will be - and that is exactly why I
love it, for being a stone, because it appears to me as a stone and always
will do, that is why I see value and meaning in each of its veins and each
of its hollows, in the yellow, in the grey, in its hardness, in the sound
it makes when I tap it, in the dryness or the wetness of its surface.
There are some stones that feel like oil or soap, others feel like leaves,
others like sand, and each of them is unique and each of them prays to Om
in its own way, each of them is Brahman but at the same time each of them
is a stone, all the more is it a stone, it is oily or juicy, and that is
what appeals to me, that is what seems so wonderful to me and so worthy of
worship. But do not let continue talking about this. Words are not good
for the invisible spirit, it always instantly becomes a little different
when spoken about, a little false, a little foolish - and even that is
something very good and something I like very much, something I fully
consent to, that which one man sees as valuable wisdom will always seem to
another to be folly.”

Govinda listened in silence.

After a pause he asked, hesitantly, “Why did you tell me all that about
the stone?”

“It just happened. I did not plan it. Or perhaps I meant to say that I
love this stone, and the river, and all these things we think about and
from which we can learn. I am capable of loving a stone, Govinda, and also
a tree or a piece of bark. Those are things, and it is possible to love
things. But it is not possible to love words. That is why teachings are
not for me, they have no hardness, no softness, no colours, no edges, no
smell, no taste, they have nothing but words. Maybe that is what is
preventing you from finding peace, maybe it is all those words. As even
redemption and virtue, even sansara and nirvana are nothing but words,
Govinda. There is nothing for nirvana to be; there is only the word,
‘nirvana’.”

Govinda said, “Nirvana is not merely a word, my friend. It is a
thought.”

Siddhartha continued, “A thought, maybe it is. I have to admit, my
friend, I do not make any great distinction between thoughts and words. To
put it simply, I do not have much respect for thoughts. I have more
respect for things. There was a man here on this ferryboat, for example,
who was my predecessor and my teacher, a holy man who, for many years,
believed simply in the river, and nothing else. He had noticed that the
river’s voice spoke to him and he learned from it, it brought him up, it
helped him to develop, it taught him. The river seemed to him like a god,
for many years he did not know that every wind, every cloud, every bird,
every beetle is just as god-like as the river he venerated so much, and
knew just as much, and had just as much to teach him. By the time this
holy man went off into the woods he knew everything, he knew more than you
and I, without a teacher, without books, and only because he believed in
the river.”

Govinda said, “And is that what you mean by ‘things,’ something
real, something that exists? Is that not just the delusion of maya, just a
picture, just an appearance? This stone of yours, this tree, this river,
are they then reality?”

“Even this question,” said Siddhartha, “no longer gives me much
bother. Perhaps these things are delusory and perhaps they are not, but
then I too am an illusion and so they continue to be the same as me. That
is what makes them so dear and so venerable for me: they are the same as
me. That is why I can love them. And now, here is a teaching that will
make you laugh: it seems to me, Govinda, that love is the most important
thing of all. Perhaps seeing through the world, explaining the world,
despising the world, is an important matter for the great thinkers, but
only one thing is important for me, the ability to love the world, not to
despise it, not to hate it or myself, but the ability to see it and myself
and all that exists with love and admiration and honour.”

“I can understand that,” said Govinda. “But this, too, is something
that the noble one has recognised as delusion. He instructs us to show
benevolence, mercy, compassion, patience, but not love; he has forbidden
us to tether our hearts to the world with love.”

“I know it well,” said Siddhartha, and his face shone with smile of
gold. “I know it well, Govinda. But now look; we find ourselves now in
the middle of a thicket of meanings, we’re quibbling about words. I
cannot deny that my words about love contradict - or seem to contradict -
the words of Gotama. And that is the very reason I mistrust words so much,
I know that this contradiction is delusory. I know that I agree with
Gotama. For how could it be that he knew nothing of love, even he who
acknowledged the transitoriness of all human existence, acknowledged it in
all its nothingness, but nonetheless loved mankind so much that he devoted
his long and strenuous life to one thing, to help them and to teach them!
And even the things about him, about your great teacher are more important
for me than his words, his actions and his life are more important than
what he said, the movements of his hand are more important than his
beliefs. I don’t see his greatness in what he said or what he thought, I
see it only in his actions, in his life.”

For a long while the two old men remained silent. Then Govinda began to
take his leave of Siddhartha, saying, “Thank you for showing me
something of your thoughts, Siddhartha. Some of them are odd, and I am not
able to understand them all straight away. Be that as it may, I give you
my thanks and wish you peaceful days.”

(Privately, though, Govinda thought to himself, “This Siddhartha is a
wonderful man, these are wonderful thoughts he expresses, his teaching
sounds foolish. The pure teachings of the noble one are different, they
are clearer, purer, easier to understand, and contain nothing odd or
foolish or ridiculous. But Siddhartha’s hands and feet seem different
from his thoughts. His eyes, his brow, his breath, his smile, his
greeting, his walk, they all seem different. Since our noble one, Gotama,
went into Nirvana I have never met any one about whom I have felt, ‘This
is a holy man.’ He alone, this Siddhartha, is the only one I have found.
His teachings may sound odd, his words may sound foolish, but his look and
his hands, his skin and his hair, everything about him is radiant with
purity, radiant with peace, radiant with gaiety and gentleness and
holiness. Not since the recent death of our noble teacher have I seen this
on anyone.”)

As Govinda was thinking these things, things which his heart strongly
resisted, he bowed to Siddhartha once again, drawn by love. He bowed
deeply as Siddhartha sat peacefully.

“Siddhartha,” he said, “we have grown into old men. It seems hardly
likely that either of us will see the other in his present form ever
again. I see, my dear friend, that you have found peace. I admit that I
have not. Give me another word, venerated one, give me something that I
can grasp, something I can understand! Give me something to take as I go
on my way. My way is often difficult, often dark, Siddhartha.”

Siddhartha remained silent and continued to look at him with the same
quiet smile. Govinda stared into his face, with anxiety, with yearning.
Sorrow and a never ending search could be read in his expression, a never
ending search without finding.

Siddhartha saw it, and grinned.

“Bow down to me!” he whispered gently into Govinda’s ear. “Bow
down to me here! Yes, closer! Very close! Kiss me on the forehead,
Govinda!”

Govinda was puzzled but, drawn by the great love and trust he had for his
friend, did as he was told, he bowed down close to him and touched his
forehead with his lips, and something wonderful happened to him. His
thoughts remained with the wonderful words that Siddhartha had spoken, he
strove in vain to remove time from his thoughts and to see nirvana and
sansara as one, he felt even a certain disdain for his friend’s words
which competed with the enormous love and veneration he felt for him, and
while all this was going on this is what happened to him:

He could no longer see his friend’s face, instead he saw other faces,
many other faces, a long sequence of them, a flowing river of faces,
hundreds of them, thousands of them, all of them came and went yet all of
them seemed to be there at the same time, all of them were in continuous
change yet all of them were Siddhartha. He saw the face of a fish, a carp
with its mouth permanently gaping in pain, a fish that was dying as its
eyes broke open, he saw the face of a new-born child, wrinkly, red and
contorted in its tears, he saw the face of a murderer, saw him as he
thrust the knife into his victim’s body - he saw, at the same moment,
this criminal as he knelt in chains and how the executioner struck off his
head with a blow of his sword - he saw the bodies of men and women naked
and struggling in positions of fervent love - he saw corpses stretched
out, still, cold, empty - he saw the heads of animals, of pigs, of
crocodiles, of elephants, of bulls, of birds - he saw gods, he saw Krsna,
he saw Agni - he saw all these forms and all these faces connected with
each other in a thousand places, helping each other, loving each other,
hating each other, destroying each other, giving birth to them anew, each
of them was a death wish, a passionate torturous acknowledgement of the
past, but none of them did die but only transformed itself, underwent
continual rebirths, each time receiving a new face although no time passed
between one face and the next - and all these forms and all these faces
rested, flowed, appeared, swam one way and flowed in between each other
and above all of this there was always something thin, something that had
no essence but nonetheless existed, like a thin piece of glass or ice,
like a transparent skin, a shell or a shape or a mask of water, and this
mask was smiling, and this mask was Siddhartha’s smiling face which he,
Govinda, was at that very moment touching with his lips. And so it was
that Govinda saw the smile on the mask, the smile of unity over and above
the forms as they rushed past, the smile of simultaneity over the thousand
births and deaths, this smile of Siddhartha’s was exactly the same, was
exactly identical, calm, fine, impenetrable, perhaps benevolent, perhaps
mocking, wise, the thousand-fold smile of Gotama, the buddha, the smile he
had seen and venerated a hundred times himself. Govinda knew that this was
how the perfect ones smiled.

He no longer knew whether time existed, he no longer knew whether this
vision had lasted one second or a hundred years, he no longer knew whether
a Siddhartha or a Gotama or an I and you existed. It was as if his deepest
part had been struck with an arrow from the divine, causing a wound that
tasted so sweet, his innermost part was enchanted, was dissolved. Govinda
continued to stand there bent over Siddhartha’s quiet face, the face he
had just kissed, the face that had just been the theatre for all forms,
all becoming, all existence. That face, that under its surface had shown
the depths of the thousands, remained unchanged, it bore a peaceful smile,
a smile that was gentle and tender, perhaps very benevolent, perhaps very
mocking, just like the smile on the face of the noble one.

Govinda bowed deeply, tears that he was unaware of ran from his eyes and
over his aged face, the sense of deepest love burnt in him like a fire,
the humblest veneration burnt in his heart. He bowed deeply, touching the
ground in front of Siddhartha who sat motionless, whose smile reminded him
of everything in his life he had ever loved, of everything in his life
that had been worthwhile to him, and holy.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Public License

By exercising the Licensed Rights (defined below), You accept and agree to
be bound by the terms and conditions of this Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License
("Public License"). To the extent this Public License may be interpreted
as a contract, You are granted the Licensed Rights in consideration of
Your acceptance of these terms and conditions, and the Licensor grants You
such rights in consideration of benefits the Licensor receives from making
the Licensed Material available under these terms and conditions.

Section 1 – Definitions.

 a. Adapted Material means material subject to Copyright and Similar
  Rights that is derived from or based upon the Licensed Material and in
  which the Licensed Material is translated, altered, arranged,
  transformed, or otherwise modified in a manner requiring permission
  under the Copyright and Similar Rights held by the Licensor. For
  purposes of this Public License, where the Licensed Material is a
  musical work, performance, or sound recording, Adapted Material is
  always produced where the Licensed Material is synched in timed
  relation with a moving image.
 b. Copyright and Similar Rights means copyright and/or similar rights
  closely related to copyright including, without limitation,
  performance, broadcast, sound recording, and Sui Generis Database
  Rights, without regard to how the rights are labeled or categorized.
  For purposes of this Public License, the rights specified in Section
  2(b)(1)-(2) are not Copyright and Similar Rights.
 c. Effective Technological Measures means those measures that, in the
  absence of proper authority, may not be circumvented under laws
  fulfilling obligations under Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty
  adopted on December 20, 1996, and/or similar international agreements.
 d. Exceptions and Limitations means fair use, fair dealing, and/or any
  other exception or limitation to Copyright and Similar Rights that
  applies to Your use of the Licensed Material.
 e. Licensed Material means the artistic or literary work, database, or
  other material to which the Licensor applied this Public License.
 f. Licensed Rights means the rights granted to You subject to the terms
  and conditions of this Public License, which are limited to all
  Copyright and Similar Rights that apply to Your use of the Licensed
  Material and that the Licensor has authority to license.
 g. Licensor means the individual(s) or entity(ies) granting rights under
  this Public License.
 h. NonCommercial means not primarily intended for or directed towards
  commercial advantage or monetary compensation. For purposes of this
  Public License, the exchange of the Licensed Material for other
  material subject to Copyright and Similar Rights by digital
  file-sharing or similar means is NonCommercial provided there is no
  payment of monetary compensation in connection with the exchange.
 i. Share means to provide material to the public by any means or process
  that requires permission under the Licensed Rights, such as
  reproduction, public display, public performance, distribution,
  dissemination, communication, or importation, and to make material
  available to the public including in ways that members of the public
  may access the material from a place and at a time individually chosen
  by them.
 j. Sui Generis Database Rights means rights other than copyright
  resulting from Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the
  Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases, as
  amended and/or succeeded, as well as other essentially equivalent
  rights anywhere in the world.
 k. You means the individual or entity exercising the Licensed Rights
  under this Public License. Your has a corresponding meaning.

Section 2 – Scope.

 a. License grant.

    1. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Public License, the
       Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide, royalty-free,
       non-sublicensable, non-exclusive, irrevocable license to exercise
       the Licensed Rights in the Licensed Material to:

         A. reproduce and Share the Licensed Material, in whole or in
            part, for NonCommercial purposes only; and
         B. produce and reproduce, but not Share, Adapted Material for
            NonCommercial purposes only.

    2. Exceptions and Limitations. For the avoidance of doubt, where
       Exceptions and Limitations apply to Your use, this Public License
       does not apply, and You do not need to comply with its terms and
       conditions.
    3. Term. The term of this Public License is specified in Section 6(a).
    4. Media and formats; technical modifications allowed. The Licensor
       authorizes You to exercise the Licensed Rights in all media and
       formats whether now known or hereafter created, and to make
       technical modifications necessary to do so. The Licensor waives
       and/or agrees not to assert any right or authority to forbid You
       from making technical modifications necessary to exercise the
       Licensed Rights, including technical modifications necessary to
       circumvent Effective Technological Measures. For purposes of this
       Public License, simply making modifications authorized by this
       Section 2(a)(4) never produces Adapted Material.
    5. Downstream recipients.

         A. Offer from the Licensor – Licensed Material. Every
            recipient of the Licensed Material automatically receives an
            offer from the Licensor to exercise the Licensed Rights
            under the terms and conditions of this Public License.
         B. No downstream restrictions. You may not offer or impose any
            additional or different terms or conditions on, or apply any
            Effective Technological Measures to, the Licensed Material
            if doing so restricts exercise of the Licensed Rights by any
            recipient of the Licensed Material.

    6. No endorsement. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may
       be construed as permission to assert or imply that You are, or
       that Your use of the Licensed Material is, connected with, or
       sponsored, endorsed, or granted official status by, the Licensor
       or others designated to receive attribution as provided in
       Section 3(a)(1)(A)(i).

 b. Other rights.

    1. Moral rights, such as the right of integrity, are not licensed
       under this Public License, nor are publicity, privacy, and/or
       other similar personality rights; however, to the extent
       possible, the Licensor waives and/or agrees not to assert any
       such rights held by the Licensor to the limited extent necessary
       to allow You to exercise the Licensed Rights, but not otherwise.
    2. Patent and trademark rights are not licensed under this Public
       License.
    3. To the extent possible, the Licensor waives any right to collect
       royalties from You for the exercise of the Licensed Rights,
       whether directly or through a collecting society under any
       voluntary or waivable statutory or compulsory licensing scheme.
       In all other cases the Licensor expressly reserves any right to
       collect such royalties, including when the Licensed Material is
       used other than for NonCommercial purposes.

Section 3 – License Conditions.

Your exercise of the Licensed Rights is expressly made subject to the
following conditions.

 a. Attribution.

    1. If You Share the Licensed Material, You must:

         A. retain the following if it is supplied by the Licensor with
            the Licensed Material:

             i. identification of the creator(s) of the Licensed
                Material and any others designated to receive
                attribution, in any reasonable manner requested by the
                Licensor (including by pseudonym if designated);
             ii. a copyright notice;
             iii. a notice that refers to this Public License;
             iv. a notice that refers to the disclaimer of warranties;
             v. a URI or hyperlink to the Licensed Material to the
                extent reasonably practicable;

         B. indicate if You modified the Licensed Material and retain an
            indication of any previous modifications; and
         C. indicate the Licensed Material is licensed under this Public
            License, and include the text of, or the URI or hyperlink
            to, this Public License.

       For the avoidance of doubt, You do not have permission under this
       Public License to Share Adapted Material.
    2. You may satisfy the conditions in Section 3(a)(1) in any
       reasonable manner based on the medium, means, and context in
       which You Share the Licensed Material. For example, it may be
       reasonable to satisfy the conditions by providing a URI or
       hyperlink to a resource that includes the required information.
    3. If requested by the Licensor, You must remove any of the
       information required by Section 3(a)(1)(A) to the extent
       reasonably practicable.

Section 4 – Sui Generis Database Rights.

Where the Licensed Rights include Sui Generis Database Rights that apply
to Your use of the Licensed Material:

 a. for the avoidance of doubt, Section 2(a)(1) grants You the right to
  extract, reuse, reproduce, and Share all or a substantial portion of
  the contents of the database for NonCommercial purposes only and
  provided You do not Share Adapted Material;
 b. if You include all or a substantial portion of the database contents
  in a database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights, then the
  database in which You have Sui Generis Database Rights (but not its
  individual contents) is Adapted Material; and
 c. You must comply with the conditions in Section 3(a) if You Share
  all or a substantial portion of the contents of the database.

For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 4 supplements and does not
replace Your obligations under this Public License where the Licensed
Rights include other Copyright and Similar Rights.

Section 5 – Disclaimer of Warranties and Limitation of Liability.

 a. Unless otherwise separately undertaken by the Licensor, to the extent
  possible, the Licensor offers the Licensed Material as-is and
  as-available, and makes no representations or warranties of any kind
  concerning the Licensed Material, whether express, implied, statutory,
  or other. This includes, without limitation, warranties of title,
  merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-infringement,
  absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or
  absence of errors, whether or not known or discoverable. Where
  disclaimers of warranties are not allowed in full or in part, this
  disclaimer may not apply to You.
 b. To the extent possible, in no event will the Licensor be liable to You
  on any legal theory (including, without limitation, negligence) or
  otherwise for any direct, special, indirect, incidental,
  consequential, punitive, exemplary, or other losses, costs, expenses,
  or damages arising out of this Public License or use of the Licensed
  Material, even if the Licensor has been advised of the possibility of
  such losses, costs, expenses, or damages. Where a limitation of
  liability is not allowed in full or in part, this limitation may not
  apply to You.

 c. The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided
  above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible,
  most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all
  liability.

Section 6 – Term and Termination.

 a. This Public License applies for the term of the Copyright and Similar
  Rights licensed here. However, if You fail to comply with this Public
  License, then Your rights under this Public License terminate
  automatically.
 b. Where Your right to use the Licensed Material has terminated under
  Section 6(a), it reinstates:

    1. automatically as of the date the violation is cured, provided it
       is cured within 30 days of Your discovery of the violation; or
    2. upon express reinstatement by the Licensor.

  For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 6(b) does not affect any
  right the Licensor may have to seek remedies for Your violations of
  this Public License.
 c. For the avoidance of doubt, the Licensor may also offer the Licensed
  Material under separate terms or conditions or stop distributing the
  Licensed Material at any time; however, doing so will not terminate
  this Public License.
 d. Sections 1, 5, 6, 7, and 8 survive termination of
  this Public License.

Section 7 – Other Terms and Conditions.

 a. The Licensor shall not be bound by any additional or different terms
  or conditions communicated by You unless expressly agreed.
 b. Any arrangements, understandings, or agreements regarding the Licensed
  Material not stated herein are separate from and independent of the
  terms and conditions of this Public License.

Section 8 – Interpretation.

 a. For the avoidance of doubt, this Public License does not, and shall
  not be interpreted to, reduce, limit, restrict, or impose conditions
  on any use of the Licensed Material that could lawfully be made
  without permission under this Public License.
 b. To the extent possible, if any provision of this Public License is
  deemed unenforceable, it shall be automatically reformed to the
  minimum extent necessary to make it enforceable. If the provision
  cannot be reformed, it shall be severed from this Public License
  without affecting the enforceability of the remaining terms and
  conditions.
 c. No term or condition of this Public License will be waived and no
  failure to comply consented to unless expressly agreed to by the
  Licensor.
 d. Nothing in this Public License constitutes or may be interpreted as a
  limitation upon, or waiver of, any privileges and immunities that
  apply to the Licensor or You, including from the legal processes of
  any jurisdiction or authority.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIDDHARTHA***


******* This file should be named 58344-0.txt or 58344-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/3/4/58344


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few individual works protected
by copyright law in the United States and most of the remainder of the
world, included in the Project Gutenberg collection with the
permission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright owner
for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyright
holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

        * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
        * This file contains humor which some may find offensive.  The  *
        * jokes hereafter do not in any way represent the opinion of    *
        * the collector.  This collection is intended to amuse only,    *
        * and not to insult or imply meaning.                           *
        * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

(Updated 11/6/90)

This fellow wishes to join an exclusive African lion-hunters club.  Actually,
the club's members consist entirely of aging Englishmen, who never do any
hunting, and whose only enjoyment comes when some silly sod wants to join. On
the night of the initiation, all of the members sit beneith the African sky
around three identical grass huts.  The club's founder begins to speak: "To
become one of use, you must pass the test of the three huts.  In the first
hut, there is a bottle of whiskey that must be consumed.  In the second,
there is a Bengal tiger with a bad tooth that must be removed.  In the third,
there is an amourous woman that must be satisfied."  With only a lion's skin
to wear, the man marches into the first hut, and, after a minute of gulping
noises, comes staggering out and barely makes his way in to the second.
Within seconds, the hut begins shaking as fur flies in all directions, and
screams can be heard from both man and beast within. After another moment of
silence, the man emerges from the second hut, bleeding, and covered from
head-to-toe with thousand of scratches.  He strains his eyes at the concerned
looking crowd of old men and asks "Now where's this woman with the bad tooth?"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A couple are lying in bed one night when the husband turns to his wife and
begins to kiss her and stroke her skin.  "Oh honey, I can't tonight," the
wife apologizes, "I have a gynocologist appointment tomorrow."  The man turns
over a sulks for awhile.  Suddenly, the man turns over and asks "Honey, you
don't happen to have a dentist appointment tomorrow, do you?"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A man goes to his doctor for his yearly checkup.  The doctor instructs him to
give a urine sample, a stool sample, and a sperm sample.  "Gee, I'm in kind
of a hurry Doc,"  the man says, "can I just leave a pair of my underwear?"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This guy starts getting these headaches that progressively worsen until he
can't eat, sleep, or work.  After an extensive examination, the doctor tells
him that they can cure the headaches, but that it will require an operation
where they remove both of his testicles.  The man eventually realizes that he
simply can't continue with the headaches, so he reluctantly agrees.  Upon
awaking after the operation, there is no trace of the headaches.  He checks
out of the hospital, feeling like he has been reborn.  In order to celebrate,
he decides to go into a fancy men's shop, and treat himself to the most expensive
imported suit they have.  The old man in the shop, having gotten an idea of
what the man would like, starts off to find him a suit.  "Wait," the man
says, "you don't even know my measurements yet."  The old man explains that
he's been working in the garment industry all his life, and can tell a
person's measurements just by looking at him.  To prove it, the old man
starts rattling off measurements - "33 waist, 32 inseam, 16 neck, 34 sleeve,
32 underwear."  "Correct on everything but the underwear," the man says
admiringly, "I wear size 30."  "No way," the old man says confidently, "32
underwear is definitely your size, I'm sure."  "Look," the man says, a little
irritated, "I ought to know what size underwear I wear."  The old man
interrupts him, yelling "IF YOU WORE SIZE 30 UNDERWEAR, YOU'D HAVE THE MOST
EXCRUCIATINGLY PAINFUL HEADACHES!"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The caretaker of a golfcorse is having difficulty with unreliable help, so he
decides to splurge and get four very expensive groundskeeping robots to do
the work.  The robots are so efficient that soon, everyone is complementing
management about the fine state of the golf course.  Every hedge is neatly
trimmed, every leaf raked up, every tree pruned, hardly a blade of grass is
out of place on the whole green.  The manager calls the caretaker into his
office, and compliments him on his fine choice of help.  "One thing though,"
the manager says, "some of the patrons have complained about the glare from
the sunlight reflecting off the robots' polished metal bodies.  "No problem,"
the caretaker replies, he makes a quick trip to the hardware store, buys
several gallons of flat black paint, and paints the four robots from head to
toe.  The next day, three of the robots don't show up for work, and the
fourth one robs the pro shop.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This city-slicker goes out to the country and visits a county fair.  While
he's there, he decides to buy a small pig.  He goes to a farmer and asks how
much the piglets are.  "Five bucks a pound mister," the farmer says, "just
pick one out that you like.  Having made his selection, the farmer bends
down, puts the little pig's tail in his mouth, and lifts the pig off the
ground.  The farmer bobs up and down a few times, then puts the pig down and
says "fourteen and a quarter pounds at five bucks a pound...that'll be
seventy one twenty five." "You must think I'm pretty stupid to fall for that
routine, why don't you go and get a proper scale" the man asks.  The farmer
replies that there aren't any in town, and that he and his family provide
weighing services to all the townfolk.  The city-slicker doesn't buy this, so
the farmer calls his son out.  The little boy puts the piglet's tail in his
mouth, picks him up, bobs up and down, and says "I reckon fourteen and a
quarter pounds dad."  The farmer tells the kid to go get his mother, saying
"she'll give you precisely the same measurement."  While the boy is gone, the
farmer explains how the family is known far-and-wide for their accuracy.
"Yep, we're calibrated once yearly by the local weights and measures
beureau..."  Minutes later, the little boy returns alone.  "What happened,"
the farmer asks, "where's your mom?"  "She can't come right now, pop" the boy
replies, "she's busy weighing the postman."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Heaven: the cooks are French,
           the policemen are English,
           the mechanics are German,
           the lovers are Italian
           and the bankers are Swiss.

In Hell:   the cooks are English,
           the policemen are German,
           the mechanics are French,
           the lovers are Swiss
           and the bankers are Italian.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This guy walks into a bar for the first time, and he's sitting around
drinking.   Some of the old timers are telling jokes.  One of them says
"Seventeen" and the other old timers all roar with laughter.  A little later,
another of 'em says "Thirty-Two" and again, they all laugh and holler.  Well,
the new guy can't figure out what's going on, so he asks one of the locals
next to him "What're these old-timers doin'?"  The local says "Well, they've
been hangin' around together so long they all know all the same jokes, so to
save extra talkin' they've given 'em all numbers."  The new fellow says
"That's mighty clever!  I think I'll try that."  So he stands up and says in
a loud voice "Nineteen!"  Silence; everybody just looks at him, but nobody
laughs.  Embarrassed, he sits down again, and asks the local fellow "What
happened?  Why didn't anyone laugh?"  The local says "Well, son, ya just
didn't tell it right..."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3 boys, 1 black and 2 whites and all 3rd-graders, are playing after school. As
3rd-graders tend to do, inevitably they start discussing who has the biggest
one (if you know what I mean...). To settle the matter, they agree to
determine this once and for all by means of comparison. It turns out in favor
of the black boy, who self-confidently boasts that this of course is because
he's black. He runs home to tell his mother : "Mom, Mom, guess what! We
compared our pee-pee's at the playground today, and I had the biggest one!!
That's because I'm black, right?" "No honey... that's because you're
nineteen..."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Some guys are trading increadible stories in a bar when one of them pulls
a miniature grand piano out of his pocket and sets it down on the bar.  Next
he produces a little man about a foot high from his other pocket and sets him
down on the bar.  The tiny man sits down at the piano, and immediately
starts playing the minute waltz.
     Upon the insistance of the other patrons in the bar, the man tells how he
was walking on the beach when he spotted a bottle that had washed up on shore.
Once open, the bottle produced a cloud of green smoke from which appeared a
genie.  The genie promised the man that he could have anything that he wanted.
"But he must of been hard of hearing" the man said sadly, "'cause he gave me
this twelve-inch pianist!"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bill goes to a fertility clinic.  "The first thing we need", says the doctor,
"is a sperm sample".  He gives Bill a bottle and directs him to room four.
Bill goes down the hall, opens the door to room four and finds two absolutely
gorgeous women dressed in scanty lingerie.  They procede to arouse him beyond
his wildest dreams, and in a few minutes, he heads back down the hall with a
big smile and a full bottle.  Realizing he had to pee, he opens the door to
the first bathroom he comes across, only to interrupt a guy frantically
masturbating with a copy of Playboy.  In the second bathroom a fellow was
doing the same thing with a Penthouse centerfold.  Back in the doctor's
office, Bill asks the doctor about the two other fellows.  "Oh, those guys?"
asked the doctor dismissively.  "Those're my Medicaid patients."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This guy goes skydiving for the first time.  After he jumps out of the plane,
he counts to ten, pulls the ripcoard, and nothing happens.  Only a little
worried, he pulls the cord for the auxilliary parachute, but unfortunately,
the chute still does not appear.  As he is plummeting toward the Earth, he
sees a woman coming up the other way.  He shouts to her "Do you know anything
about parachutes?"  "No", she says, "do you know anything about gas stoves?"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"You should be ashamed," the father told his son, "When Abraham Lincoln was
your age, he used to walk ten miles every day to get to school."
"Really?" the kid said.  "Well when he was your age, he was president."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A young married couple has difficulties conceiving a baby, so after a while
the wife consults her doctor, who recommends the minor of 3 possible
operations. The operation is performed, but a month later, she's still not
pregnant, so she goes to see the doctor again. This time he recommends the
medium operation, a somewhat more serious operation, but still not as
complicated as the 3rd alternative. But there's still no result, and another
month later she's back in the doctors office, and this time she gets the big
one. After having recovered in some weeks, the couple resumes normal marital
activities, and this time they actually succeed in conceiving a baby. Filled
with joy, the young wife now see's the doctor for the regular examination
during pregnancy: "We're so happy doctor, we're finally having a baby. But
what was this 3rd operation actually all about? the first two weren't that
bad, but this last one I think must have been quite a job, I was dizzy for
weeks after?" "Well" the doctor replies, "Since the first two standard
operations failed, we started suspecting your methods, rather than your
ability, so I made a connection from your throat to your uterus!"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     A famous hypnotist was performing in a large auditorium full of people
one night.  He began to speak in a soft and steady voice over the loud-
speaker system.  "Listen to the sound of my voice...", he kept repeating,
"the sound of my voice... every word is a command... the sound of my voice..."
 Pretty soon, he had every single person in the audience completely
mesmerized, each one hanging on his every word.
     Needing to take a quick piss, he announced "I will have
to leave the stage for a moment, but you will all remain in a trance while I
am gone"  And then he repeated the words "the sound of my voice... every word
is a command."  As he turned to go, he tripped over the microphone cord,
landed on his ass, and yelled "SHIT!".
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     A little withered old man walks into a timber company office, and applies
for a job as a lumberjack.  The foreman politely tries to talk him out of the
idea.  After all, he is old, small, and apparently much too weak to fell
trees.  The old man picks up an axe and walks over to a huge redwood.  As he
goes to work, a high-pitched whine comes from the axe, chips of wood fly
everwhere, and the odor of burning wood fills the air.  In record time, the
old man is finished chopping down the tree.
     "That's just astounding," the forman says, "wherever did you learn to
chop down trees like that?"
     "Well now," the old man smiles, "have you ever heard of the Sahara
Forest?"
     "You mean the Sahara Desert."
     "Sure, that's what it's called NOW..."
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This guy buys a parrot.  Every morning he stands in front of the cage and asks
in a pleasant voice "Can you talk?"  This goes on for weeks with absolutely no
response from the bird.
Finally one morning, totally fed up, he shouts "CAN YOU TALK, YOU STUPID
CREATURE?  CAN YOU TALK?"
The bird looks him in the eye and says "I can talk, all right.  Can you fly?"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Young Charlie is having trouble with his first grade addition homework,
so his father decides to help.  He teaches the Charlie how to add small
numbers by counting on his fingers.  Eventually, the little boy becomes quite
good.  "But remember," the father says, "you can't use your fingers in school
-- you'll have to do it in your head."
    The next day at school, the teacher calls on Charlie and asks him "what is
five plus five?"  Charlie starts to raise his hands, but remembering what
his father said, hides them in his pockets.  After a few seconds of counting,
Charlie announces "Eleven!"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

They're making a new movi

=================================================================
        _Wet_Dream_
        It was April the 41st.  Being a quadruple leap year, I was
        driving in downtown Atlantis.  My Barracuda was in the shop, so
        I was in a rented Stingray and it was overheating.

        So, I pulled into a Shell station.  They said I'd blown a seal.
        I said, "Fix the damn thing and leave my personal life out of
        it, okay pal?"

        While they were doing that I walked over to a place called The
        Oyster Bar.  A real dive.  But I knew the owner (he used to play
        for the Dolphins).  I said, "Hi Gill!"  (you have to yell, he's
	hard of herring).

	chorus:

	    Think I had a wet dream
	    Cruising through the Gulf Stream
	    Oooooh oooooh-ooooh oooooh
	    Wet dream

	Gil was also down on his luck.  Fact is, he was barely keeping
	his head below water.  I bellied up to the sand bar.  He poured
	me the usual -- rusty snail, hold the grunion, shaken, not
	stirred, with a peanut butter and jellyfish sandwich on the
	side, heavy on the mako.

	I slipped him the fin, on porpoise.  I was feeling good.  I even
	slipped a sand dollar in the box for Jerry's squids, for the
	halibut.

	Well, the place was crowded -- we were packed in like sardines.
	They were all there to listen to the big band sounds of Tommy
	Dorsal -- what sole!  Tommy was rockin' the place with a very
	popular tuna -- "Salmon 'Chanted Evening".  And the stage was
	surrounded by screaming groupers, probably there to see the bass
	player.

	One of them was this cute little yellow-tail and she's givin' me
	the eye, so I figure this is my chance for a little fun.  You
	know, a little pisces.

	But she said things I just couldn't fathom; she was too deep.
	Seemed to be under a lot of pressure.  Boy could she drink!  She
	drank like a -- she drank a lot.  I said, "What's your sign?"

	She said, "Aquarian."

	I said, "Great!  Let's get tanked!"

	<chorus>

	I invited her up to my place for a little midnight bait.  I
	said, "Come on baby.  It'll only take a few minnows."  She threw
	me that same old line:  "Not tonight.  I got a haddock."  And
	she wasn't kidding, either, 'cause in came the biggest,
	meanest-looking haddock I'd ever seen come down the pike.  He
	was covered with mussels.  He came over to me and said, "Listen,
	shrimp.  Don't you come trolling around here."  What a crab.
	This guy was steamed.  I could see the anchor in his eyes.

	I turned to him and said, "A-balone.  You're just being
	shellfish."  Well, I knew there was going to be trouble and so
	did Gill 'cause he was already on the phone to the cods.  The
	haddock hits me with a sucker punch.  I catch him with a left
	hook.  He eels over.  It was a fluke, but there he was, lying on
	the deck, flat as a mackerel.  Kelpless.

	I said, "Forget the cods, Gill, this guy's gonna need a
	sturgeon."  Well, the yellow-tail was impressed with the way I
	landed her boyfriend.  She came over to me and said, "Hey big
	boy, you're really a game fish.  What's your name?"

	I said, "Marlin."

	<chorus>

	Well, from then on we had a whale of a time.  I took her out to
	dinner.  I took her to dance.  I bought her a bouquet of
	flounders.  And then I went home with her.  And what did I get
	for my troubles?  A case of the clams.

	<chorus>
======================================================================

This is a true story told by a friend of mine. It happened to a girl she knew.
 There was this girl driving along the highway, when she suddely had to visit
the restroom. Unfortunately there is none along the highway, and she was a
long way from home. Well, after a while she just had to stop, and when she
saw this big trashbin she desided to stop and do it behind it.
 Aaaaah, what a relief. While she sat there she raised her head and saw
samething on top of the trashbin, it looked like a microwave-oven. "Why would
someone throw away a micowave-oven? My husband is good at fixing such things,
so I'll take it with me".
 Some miles later she raealized a policecar behind, and pulled to the side
thinking:
	"What is this, I haven't gone too fast".
The policeman comes over to her and takes a look into her car.
	"What is this you have in the backseat?"
	"Oh it's a microwave-oven I found in a trashbin along the road."
She told the policeman the story about the oven and that her husband should
fix it.
	"Well mrs. it is no microwave-oven you have in the backseat of your
car - it is a *radar*"
P.S. I have seen some radars, but no one looks even close to a microwave-oven,
- maybe it is a new brand :)

Three marines, a white man, a black man, and a jewish man, were
sitting in a foxhole (during a war) when  BLAMMO!!!!!  They are
all wasted by enemy fire.  Like all good Marines, they go straight
to hell.  The devil greets them, and says, "Look, I'm in a sporting
mood today.  Tell you what-- for a hundred bucks each, I'll let you
go back and live again."
"A hundred bucks??!!!??  Is that all???" says the white guy, who
whips out the cash and gives it to the devil.  POOOOF!  He is back
in the foxhole.  A medic comes running over.  "I saw the whole thing,"
he says.  "I thought you were dead.  What happened???"
The white guy tells the story of being in hell, and how he got out
for a hundred dollars.  "But where are the other two guys?" asks
the medic.
Says the white-- "Well, the last I heard, the Jew had it down
to $49.50 and the black was still looking for a co-signer."

One day, while walking down a street, a marine general saw a boy shoveling
sh*t into a pile.
The general asked the boy, "Son, why are you shoveling that Sh*t into a pile?"
The boy responded, "I'm making me an Admiral!"
The general thought this was about the funniest thing he had ever seen so
he went back to the office and told his friend, an admiral, about what he had
it.  The admiral wanted to see this for himself, so the general took the
admiral out to where the boy was.
The admiral asked, "Son, what are you building?"
The boy responded, "I'm building me an admiral."
Stunned, the admiral asked, "Why are you building an admiral?"
"Cause I ain't got enough sh*t to build me a marine!" said the boy.  :)

I had a somewhat similar experience, however I had a vasectomy and had to
go back 2 months later so they could confirm that the operation was a sccess.
Well, the nurse gave me a glass jar with a lid on it, then proceded to show
me to the door and ask me if I would also like to take one of their handy-
dandy magazines in with me. I told her that I have no need for a magazine
and proceded into the restroom. Well......I guess it was about a half hour
later when the nurse came knocking on the door and asked "Sir, are you having
some kinda problem in there?" I answered "Well kinda, Ya see I shook it up
and down, I beat it against the sink, I slammed it against the wall, I wore
out my right hand, I sprained my left hand, and y'know I'm just about to
give up on tryin' to get this dad-burned jar open".

A few days ago it was reported that David Letterman was no longer going
to have the "top ten" list on every show....which begs the question -
what are the top ten reasons the "top ten" list will not be on every
David Letterman show?
Number -
10. Needs air time to introduce his new line of hair-care products.
 9. He lost the only writer who could count from 10 to 1.
 8. G.E. cancelled his login to NETNEWS - rec.humor.
 7. Needs a funnier segment to compete with C-SPAN.
 6. NBC's laugh machine has been overheating.
 5. Paul's drummer gets paid way too much extra for this segment.
 4. Dave has more important things to do - like smile at the camera -
    real close.
 3. What next!!!? - no more dumb animal tricks?
 2. Nothing IS sacred to a dork.
and.... the number one reason why David Letterman is not doing the
        "top ten" list on a regular basis is -
 1. He wants to be more like Jay Leno.

A blonde was walking along, when she looked up
to observe a bird flying overhead.  Suddenly, the
bird drops a load when it was directly over her.
The blonde says, "Good thing I had my mouth
open, or that would've hit me right in the face!!!"

Why are there no blacks in the cartoon the "Flinstones"?
Because they were still monkeys at that time.

Cannibal #1: Shall I boil the new missionary, Chief?
Cannibal #2: No, he's a friar.

Unravelling of the mysteries of the Northern lights!
Aurora Borealis revealed!
After reading too much about flat-panel plasma displays, I received a
divine revelation telling me the purpose of the shimmering curtains of
light in the Northern skies: It's a planetary terminal (but, luckily,
not the console).
With the knowledge of the revelation I was able to reinterpret the
patterns, and saw this:
$
	Out of space - device(china)
	Out of space - device(china)
	Out of space - device(china)
su -
Password:
#shutdown -y -g1y
Not on console
#reboot
Not on console
#df /dev/asia
	(/dev/asia      ):        89 blocks:            0 i-nodes
#rm -r /usr/acct/ussr
#df /dev/asia
	(/dev/asia      ):    257349 blocks:         8437 i-nodes
#^d
$


A guy wakes up one morning, stretches turns to his wife and
says "Wow I slept well, I feel great!"
His wife looks at him and says, "Well I wouldnt go to work
if I were you, you look terrible!, are you sure you feel ok?"
He replies "Yeah I feel fine" then he hops out of bed and
goes to work.
  While at work, he's whistling, singing and generally enjoying
a wonderful day, and all the time his friends are coming up and
asking if he feels alright cos he looks awful. Eventually his
boss comes in sees him and says, "Hey, you look terrible, take
the rest of the day off", He starts to argue,saying he feels great
but the boss orders him out.
  Well, the guy thinks, maybe there is something to all this,
I'd better go to the doctor just in case.
  At the doctors, he sits down and tells the MD "Look Doc,
all day Ive been feeling great but everyone says I look
awful, whats up?"
  The Doc gets down his big book of medicine and starts to flick
through it :
  "Hmm, looks awful, feels awful, no thats not it...."
(flip)
"Looks great, feels great, nooo....."
(flip)
"Looks great, feels awful, nope......"
(flip)
"AH here we are, 'looks awful, feels great' : you're a cunt"

My favorite is  "If she were two inches taller she'd be round"

There is this pack of Huskies(UW) walking down the street being led by their
head coach.  As they approach an ally, a solitary Cougar(WSU) jumps out and
starts taunting the Huskies saying, "Ha you Huskies are sooo dumb and weak
that I could take you all on single handed....you all are just a pack of
dogs...hahaha", and he jumps back in.  Well, not to let his team stand for
such insults, the coach says, "Ok, half of you go into that ally and get
that Cougar!"  So half of the team, about 50 men, run into the ally.  From
the ally comes the sound of a horrific fight and then silence which is soon
broken by the Cougar jumping back out and taunting the Huskies once again,
"HA HA HA, you are all so dumb....even I can't believe it...come and get me
if you dare", after which he jumps back in.  Of course the rest of the
Husky team starts running for the ally to get the Cougar, but before they
get there, one battered Husky crawls out of the ally saying, "No Wait!,
it's a trap, there are TWO of them!"

------------
Once, a traveling salesman was driving along an old country dirt road, miles from
civilization.  Things would have been fine, but needed to take a shit, real bad.
So, at the next farm house he found, he stopped and asked the farmer if he could
use his restroom.  "Sure thing," said the farmer, pointing to an old, dilapidated
outhouse.

Well, the salesman was obviously in something of a hurry, so he didn't argue with
the man.  He dropped his drawers, and (avoiding splinters), took his seat.  Well,
before and during such a grand movement, he was too busy to take note that there
was nothing with which to clean up with afterward.  When he DID notice, it was too
late.

"Sir," he called to the farmer, still doing chores on the outside, "there doesn't
seem to be any toilet paper in here.  How am I supposed to clean up?"

"Well, do you see that open slot in the wall?"

"Yeah, I do," said the salesman, looking at what at first appeared to be a large,
horizontal space between the boards in the side of the outhouse.

"Well, here's what you do: use your hand to clean off, and when you're finished,
stick your hand in the slot, and it'll be cleaned right off."

The saleman was skeptical, and also a bit squeamish, but he had no choice.  He
cleaned himself off as best he could, and stuck his hand through the slot, into
the daylight.

Now, just on the other side of the wall, outside the hole, there was a monkey,
holding two bricks.  When the man's hand appeared through the slot, the monkey
smashed those bricks together as hard as he could, sandwiching the man's hand.

Back in the john, the man cries out in pain as his hand gets smashed, pulls it
back in, and sticks the hand in his mouth.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q> How many blondes does it take to play tag?
A> One.  (think about it)

"Practice safe government -- use a kingdom."

An American, a German, and a Polishman are on a safari deep in the woods
of Africa.  The tour guide, a native African, stopped suddenly, and looked at
the gentlemen.  He said, "I will not go further in this jungle.  Just ahead
are rare cannibals.  I will not risk my life."  The three gentlemen look at
each other, and decide to check it out.  The tour guide split, and the guys
started walking.  It wasn't long before they were captured by the cannibals.
The cannibals tied them up and hung them upside down from a tree.  The chief
came up to them and said, "We are cannibals.  We will eat your insides, use
your bones for tools, and use your skin to cover our canoes.".  The chief turned
to the American and said, "Do you have a last request?".  The American replied,
"Bring me a knife.".  The chief brings him a knife and hands it to the
American.  The American opens the knife and says, "I will die with pride!", and
slits his throat.  The chief asked the same thing to the German.  The German
said, "Bring me a knife also.".  The chief brings hime the knife, and the
German said, "I won't let YO kill me!", and he stabs himself in the heart.  The
chief turned to the Polishman, and said, "What is your request?".  The
Polishman says, "Bring me a fork.".  The chief was puzzled, but he brought him
a fork.  The Polishman started stabbing himself all over his body, screaming,
"You're not going to make a canoe out of me!!

There once was a man from Hitachi
Whose ass was becoming all blotchy
With his face full of dread
He finally said
It must've been the night with Liberace.

Is is true that Magic Johnson claims that his HIV infection
has nothing to do with his ability to come from behind?

NEWS FLASH -
   The Centers for Disease Control have discovered a new process
by which AIDS can be transmitted:   Magic.

Magic Johnson - Born in Detroit, reared in LA.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Imagine for a moment if the computer revolution had occoured a decade or
so sooner. With all the power and chaos of the 60's, it's not to hard to
go further and pretend that

Computer Nerds Could Have Controlled Network Programming.

by Robert S. Coats

Gilligan's Island:
The Professor finds some rare binary coconuts that can be used to upgrade
the ROM in his bamboo clone modem to support X.25. After hours of effort,
he manages to establish a connection via his papaya-based VT 100 terminal
and satellite uplink with Telenet, but falls asleep from exhaustion.
Gilligan walks up and types "+++" then "ATH" and drops the line. The
Skipper beans him with a rock and finally loses it, his seafaring years
catch up with him and he starts making lewd remarks to Mary Ann about
playing Leisure Suit Larry IV together. Meanwhile, Mr. Howell finally
figures out how to work the ISDN set that was accidently dropped by a
passing JAL jet and has a heart attack when he hears via Dow Jones News
Retrieval that the stock market has soared above 3000 points. Ginger calls
CompuServe and E-mails some software developers in an effort to convince
them that she should would be a good model for MacStripPoker 2.0.
Eventually, all connectivity on the island is lost, when Gilligan
discovers an actor in a bad gorilla costume has shorted pins 2&3 on the
serial cable, and everybody on the island has just been echoing characters
to each other.

Beverly Hillbillies
Miss Jane tries to convince Mr. Drysdale to network all the PCs in the
bank, but, typically, he won't spend the money. Frustrated, Miss Jane
pleads with Jed Clampett to persuade Mr. Drysdale to "put in the LAN," but
Jed thinks she said "put in the ham." Jed then gets Granny to cook up a
dozen hams and has Jethro and Ellie Mae bring them to the bank. When they
arrive, everybody is out to lunch, so Jethro begins to distribute the
hams, but is frustrated when he can't get the coaxial cable to stay
attached to the ham bone. To further complicate matters, Ellie May has
brought along her pet goats, which begin to eat the ham and cable, causing
the the VAX to short out and force an emergency electronic fund transfer
of the Clampett millions to a competitive bank. As Mr. Drysdale is seen
chasing Miss Jane down the hall with a crazed look in his eye, swinging a
ham at her, Jed is heard to remark, "Weee-doggie! Why look at that Granny.
Mr. Drysdale is so happy about whut we done, he's gonna give Miss Jane her
own ham!"

The Brady Bunch
Peter uses Crosstalk Mk.4 to dial into the high school computer and,
through hacking tricks picked up from a local "adults only" BBS, is able
to access individual student's "permanent records." He scans through the
listings, then, using a clever keyboard macro, alters his completed
courses such that he won't be required to take English Lit again. However,
Jan is working in the school office at the time and is alerted to the
invasion by a diligent anti-virual TSR. She is then tormented with having
to decide to do the "right thing" or be loyal to her brother. Jan goes
home and talks to Alice, who says she should analyze all the factors and
then decide after using the new artificial intelligence software Mr. Brady
has recently installed on his '386 laptop. Jan tries to use the program,
but instead accidently deletes all the files in the Harvard Graphics
directory, leaving Mr. Brady to blow a presentation the next day. Mrs.
Brady finds out via Jan what happened, and forces Peter to write "I will
not hack into the school computer" 5000 times with EDLIN while the rest of
the family eats angle food cake on the patio.

The Mary Tyler Moore Show
Mr. Grant tells Mary to come up with some hard facts about all the
activity out in Silicon Valley. Mary grabs her Mac portable and jumps on a
plane west. Unfortunately, she leaves the Mac switched on and, due to an
undiscovered bug in the latest release of System and Finder, the hard disk
continually optimizes itself when no keyboard input is recorded for more
than five minutes. Needless to say, she has a dead Mac when arriving and
spends the next few hours trying to find a replacement. Meanwhile, Ted
begins his broadcast and notes that "We expected to have some good
information about Silicon Valley for this broadcast, but somebody had to
take a Mac and not a reliable laptop PC!" Frantic, Mary calls long
distance over crystalline fiber optic lines to get help from Rhoda, who
doesn't answer the phone because she is playing Bomber and has the
headphones on. However, Phyllis's snotty daughter is around and answers.
She listens to Mary whine, then hangs up the phone. Mary is last seen
violently flinging the Mac out a speeding taxi window while crossing the
Bay Bridge.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
In view of recent admonitions against jokes maligning any
class of people, I thought I'd put together some examples
of humor that are approved within the Tandem Values.  Note
how these jokes arise from existing ones that are not
permitted, showing that humor can be found anywhere.


WRONG:  Why can't blondes take coffee breaks?

This joke is offensive to two classes of people, blondes and
coffee drinkers.  It might also offend people who do not drink
coffee for religious reasons.

RIGHT:  Why can't pigmentially-challenged individuals take a short
          rest between job tasks?
        Because the Mail Police are reading this joke.


WRONG:  How do you kill a pink elephant?

This joke has many problems, as it is offensive to environmentalists,
vegetarians, and elephants of all colors.  It also promotes racism
and classism among elephants, and, perhaps, among other species as
well.  It should not be sent to the HUMOR sig for these reasons.

RIGHT:  How do you address an elephant of any color whatsoever?
        Ask the Mail Police for full instructions.


WRONG:  How do you double the value of a Yugo?

This joke would not be allowed because it offends Yugoslavians,
other people affected by the strife in Eastern Europe, and goes
against the Communist belief system that material goods are
provided by the state for its populace and therefore should have
no monetary value whatsoever.  Members of the bicycle-sig will
also feel uncomfortable because this joke encourgages automobile
use.

RIGHT:  How do you improve a vehicle?
        Confirm with the Mail Police that the vehicle is allowed
          on Tandem Mail.


WRONG:  An engineer, a physicist, a mathematician, and a psychologist
          are stuck in a burning building.  Who gets out alive?

This message should not be sent because it encourgages classism,
elitism, and implies that those who study different disciplines
deserve to perish in a tragedy through no fault of their own.
Tandem Values require respect for all individuals in all jobs
they do.

RIGHT:  Four Tandemites are stuck in a burning building.  How do
          you rescue all of them before it collapses?
        First meet with the Mail Police to be sure no favoritism
          is shown towards any group in whom is rescued initially.


WRONG:  How do you make love to an <ethnic> woman?

There are so many reasons this joke is inappropriate for Tandem
mail that this memo cannot begin to catalog all of them.  Hiding
behind the designator <ethnic> does not absolve the joke-sender
of sending abusive mail messages to protected groups, because it
is usually quite clear which group is being slandered.  In any
event, the sobriquet <ethnic> implies that non-ethnics are in
some way superior, which goes against Tandem Values.

The joke also shows a lack of respect for women in two ways.
First, it implies that the teller and listener of the joke are
both male.  No joke of that sort should be sent, because this
precludes women from feeling fully accepted at Tandem.  Second,
it implies that the woman can only be satisfied one particular
way, and that this rests outside of her, i.e. she needs a man to
be complete.  Finally, this joke excludes gays and lesbians since
it has a heterosexualist bias.

RIGHT:  How does a Tandemite get satisfaction?
        Have the Mail Police ensure no one is offending anyone else.


WRONG:  What happens when you cross a Jehovah's Witness with
          a dyslexic agnostic?

Jokes that demean religious groups are unacceptable.  This includes
people who choose not to practice religion.  Dyslexics are an
example of a handicapped class and should not be insulted.
This joke is offensive to creationists because it implies that
evolution proceeds due to inter-species mating habits.  Members
of certain religious groups may also find these random matings
offensive to their belief systems.

RIGHT:  Tell me the best way all religious groups can feel
          comfortable working together at Tandem.
        I'll have the Mail Police explain that to you right away.


WRONG:  A gorilla walks into a bar and orders a martini.

Since a number of Tandem employees are uncomfortable with
the problems of alcohol, jokes should not be set in bars
or at social gatherings noted for alcohol usage.

RIGHT:  A gorilla walks into a hardware store and orders a martini.

WRONG:  An IBM salesman is stuck on a desert island.

Desert islands make reference to the recent Gulf War, and should
be avoided.  It is also against Tandem values to make jokes about
the competition.  Simply describing their products is all the
humor that's necessary.

RIGHT:  An IBM AS/400 is set up in a room at 105 degrees
          Fahrenheit (40 C).  The Mail Police are called to
          see if it crashes, which it probably will.


WRONG:  Which doesn't belong, meat, wife, or blowjob?

Haven't you learned anything yet?  This joke is sexist and
offensive to women and vegetarians.

RIGHT:  Which doesn't belong, ethics, values, or Mail Police?


WRONG:  A man's penis size doesn't matter, unless you're having
          sex with him.
That doesn't mean you can make fun of men, just because they're
the dominant class.  Besides, these jokes usually trigger a barrage
of anti-female ones, and then we're back to Lawsuit City.

RIGHT:  A Tandemite's paycheck size doesn't matter, unless they're
          arguing with the Mail Police.


WRONG:  How many CNN reporters does it take to change a light bulb?

Tandem Values preclude mention of corporate entities, such as CNN
in this example.  The whole category of light bulb jokes is also
contraindicated, as General Electric may choose to sue over
improper use of their product.

RIGHT:  How many TTN reporters does it take to produce "First Friday?"
        Wait a minute, the Mail Police want to be sure this isn't a
          violation of something.


WRONG:  What did Pee-Wee Herman say to Jeffrey Dahmer?

Can't you do anything right?  It's "What did Jeffrey Dahmer
say to Pee-Wee Herman?" and the answer is "Stop playing with
my food."
--------------------------------------------------------------------
A while ago, I posted a collection of quotes I plastered my door with.  I've
also got these:
  Here we sit, 'mongst yonder junk.
Our room smells like a skunk.
Eyes will water, and noses burn--
It's enough to make your stomach churn.
  This room will give you quite a scare;
To all who enter here beware:
You'll lose all hope of breathing air!
  Since the mess in this room has known antidote,
You're better off just leaving a note.

Here we sit, we're cursed liars:
No mess, no junk, no toxic fires.
Alas, dear lass:  would dass to ask?
How to repent:  prevent this indenting
   precedent for demented impediments
   with pennace?
For here we sit, 'mongst yonder space,
Void of clutter, butter, and mace.
There is no trace; we've room to pace!
So now the old is obsolete.
Bear it well, and be discrete.

Here I sit, beyonder you,
Wonder what I want to do.
Flee the bees, ski the seas,
Knee the peas, or speak Chinese--
All these would please my Pekinese.
  But what I really want is poetry,
And then you really have to know a tree.
Like the maple or the birch or the elm or the oak,
And don't forget the giant artichoke.
  But alas, dear lass, I have to pass,
For I know no trees and blow no breeze,
Believe me reader!  I do not tease,
Deceive the dead, or weave the web,
Perceive the bed, or leave the sled!
  So what I'll do no soul could guess--
I'm going to make my room a mess.

A kindly old priest, while taking his afternoon walk, sees a little boy
sitting beside a basket in the back yard of a house in the neighborhood.
The priest takes a closer look and notices that the basket contains a
mother cat and five tiny kittens, obviously just a few days old.
  "Well, now," the priest says to the child, "and what kind of kittens
might those be?"
  "They're Catholic kittens, Father!"  says the little boy.
  The priest, chuckling, pats the kid on the head and walks on.
  Three weeks later, the priest is taking his walk and sees the same
little boy playing in the yard.  The kittens are there, too, now
much larger and scampering around.
  The priest smiles and says "Well, my little friend, what kind of
kittens did you say those were?"
  "They're agnostic kittens, Father."  the little boy answers.
Taken aback, the priest asks "Now, what would make you say a thing
like that?"
  "Well," the boy says, "they have their eyes open now!"

Why is everyone in Alaska grinding the sights off of their handguns?
So when the Grizzly Bear gets ahold of the gun, it doesn't hurt as much
when he shoves it up uour ass!!!!

Q.  Why does Ted Kennedy cry during sex?
A.  Mace.

What do you call a turtle with a hard-on?
A slow poke.

What was the blonde psychic's greatest achievement?
An IN-body experience!

Q: Why is the Disease Control Center changing the name of the AIDS virus ?
a: Because all the minorities keep signing up for it !

=========================================================================
(Excerpts quoted from Sept 1991 issue of MacUser)

Q: ... Periodically the screen shakes. Can this harm the hardware? ...

Andy: ... And don't forget that, according to Apple's standard warranty card,
if technicians tell you, "Oh, they all do that," you're allowed to poke them
right in the eye. ...

Bob: Excellent advice. I disagree only on one point: I don't recommend going
around poking technicians in the eye. A better technique is to loudly proclaim,
"To h*** with this! I can buy an IBM clone and Windows 3 for one-tenth the cost
of a similarly equipped Mac!" I guarantee your Mac will be fixed on the spot.

Q: ... I get a message saying, "The Application has unexpectly quit (1)." ...

Bob: ... Of course, with Systems 6.0.7 and 7, Apple has replaced the
meaningless error-ID numbers (1, 2, 12, 25, and so on) with meaningless phrases
such as "Co-processor not installed," "Bus error," and the ever-popular
"Address error." Not only are these phrases meaningful only to people who
understand the internal architecture ... but they also often have nothing to do
with the cause of the problem.
==========================================================================
ObJoke:  This guy goes to Texas on vacation.  (No, that's not the
punchline.)  When he's ready to leave the airport, he hails a cab, but
a stretch limo pulls up.  So he tells the driver he only wanted a
cab.
     "This is a cab, sir.  Everything's bigger in Texas."
     Not bad, the guy thinks.  So he gets to his hotel, and when he's
shown to his room, it's a four-room suite with jacuzzi and waterbed.
The man protests that he only wanted a single room.
     "This is a single room, sir.  Everything's bigger in Texas."
     Better and better.  After a nap, the guy goes down to the hotel
bar to have a beer before dinner.  The bartender brings him a
two-quart pitcher, and the guy points out he only wanted one beer.
     "This is your beer, sir.  Everything's bigger in Texas."
     After this beer, the guy is feeling a little tipsy, and he can't
find his way to the restaurant.  He ends up falling in the hotel pool
instead.  So he yells, "Don't flush!"

Q: Why don't witches have babies?
A: Because goblins have hollow weenies.

If Tarzan and Jane were black, what would Cheeta be??
The smartest of the three.

Why weren't there any black dudes on the Flintstones??
Because they were still apes back then.

What do you say to Mike Tyson when he is all tied up?
Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga Nigga

What do you call an intelligent blonde?
A golden retriever.

Bumper Sticker:
David Duke is A-OKKK with me!

I heard that you were feeling ill,
Headaches, Fever, and a chill,
I came to help restore your pluck,
Cause I'm the nurse who likes to ......

	I just heard David Duke was thinking of running for President next
	year in 1992 and I thought of a great campaign slogan:
		DAVID DUKE IN 92!!!...feet of water that is...

	Chi-O Chi-O is off to bed we go.
	I paid my buck
	I want my fuck
	Chi-O Chi-o

There once was a man from Eeling
Who pounded his pud with great feeling
Then like a trout
He'd stick his mouth out
And wait for the drops from the ceiling!

The once was a woman from Decater
Who was laid by a big alligator
Now nobody knew
What became of those two
Cuz after he laid her he ate her

Little Bo Peep fucked a sheep
Blew a horse, licked his feet
She ate his ass so very nice
Tongued his balls not once but twice...

IBM stands for:
Intercourse       Beats       Masturbation
Inefficient       But         Marketable
Imperialism       By          Marketing
Idiots            Become      Managers
Insolence         Breeds      Mediocrity
Incredibly        Brilliant   Marketing
Incredibly        Big         Monopoly
I                 Became      Macintosh

The latest put-down in Iran:  May you win a Salmon Rushdie look-alike contest.

Also, one from Paris, I believe:  May you lose all your teeth except one, and
  get a toothache.

what is the object of Jewish football?
Answer: to get the quarter back.

The famous producer calls the director:
-"We're going to make a movie about the life
  of Charles Aznavour.  We've already got a
  great actor for the leading part - Belmondo."
-"Belmondo ?", the director says surprised, "But don't
  you think it would be more natural and easier if
  we had Aznavour himself for that part ?"
-"Oh, no!...He's too short."

-"Honey!  Hug me, please, just like Robert Redford
  in that movie yesterday."
-"Like Robert Redford, you say ?  Well, well, like
  Robert Redford....Do you know how much he gets
  for a hug like that ?"

        Apropos recent events, in case you're wondering what will become
        of all the unemployed KGB men in the event of a change of regime in
        the USSR, I was talking to a German friend recently and asked him
        what had become of all the former Stasi secret policement of East
        Germany.
        "Oh they're all taxi drivers now", he said, "it was the obvious
         solution".
        "Why is that?", I asked.
        "Simple", he said, "you just give them your name -- and they know
         where you live."

        Q. How many University Football Team players takes to screw a
light bulb?
	A. Just one.  But he takes 3 credits for it !

i guess irvin didn't really have a magic "johnson"?

Why are Mexican low-rider steering wheels only about 6 inches in diameter ??
So they can drive with their handcuffs on !

Q:      Why do blondes tattoo their zipcode under their belly button?
A:      So they can get the male into the right box.

Q:      Why don't blondes have elevator jobs?
A:      They don't know the route.

Q:      How did the blonde break her leg playing hockey with the Toronto
        Maple Leafs?
A:      She fell out of a tree.

Q:      How do you change a blonde's mind?
A:      Blow in her ear.

Q:      How do you confuse a blonde?
A:      Give her M&M's and tell her to put them in alpabetical order.

Q:      What can strike a blonde without her even knowing it?
A:      A thought.

Q:      Why do blondes work seven days a week?
A:      So you don't have to retrain them on Monday.

=====================================================================
MOTHER'S DICTIONARY:
AMNESIA: condition that enables a woman who has gone through
labor to have sex again.

BOTTLE FEEDING: an opportunity for Daddy to get up at 2am
too.

DEFENSE: what you'd better have around de yard if you're
going to let de children ply outside.

DROOLING: how teething babies wash their chins.

DUMBWAITER: one who asks if the kids would care to order
dessert.

FAMILY PLANNING: the art of spacing your children the proper
distance apart to keep you on the edge of financial disaster

FEEDBACK: the inevitable result when the baby doesn't
appreciate the strained carrots.

FULL NAME: what you call your child when you're mad at him.

GRANDPARENTS: the people who think your children are
wonderful even though they're sure you're not raising them
right.

HEARSAY: what toddlers do when anyone mutters a dirty word.

IMPREGNABLE: a woman whose memory of labor is still vivid.

INDEPENDENT: how we want our children to be as long as they
do everything we say.

LOOK OUT!: what it's too late for your child to do by the
time you scream it

OW: the first word spoken by children with older siblings

PRENATAL: when your life was still somewhat your own.

PREPARED CHILDBIRTH: a contradiction in terms

PUDDLE: a small body of water that draws other small bodies
wearing dry shoes into it.

SHOW OFF: a child who is more talented than yours.

STERILIZE: what your do to your first baby's pacifier by
boiling it and to your last baby's pacifier by blowing on it

STOREROOM: the distance required between the supermarket
aisles so that children in shopping carts can't quite reach
anything.

TEMPER TANTRUMS: what you should keep to a minimum so as to
not upset the children.

THUNDERSTORM: a chance to see how many family members can fit
into one bed.

TOP BUNK: where you should never put a child wearing Superman
jammies.

TWO-MINUTE WARNING: when the baby's face turns red and she
begins to make those familiar grunting noises.

VERBAL: able to whine in words

WEAKER SEX: the kind you have after the kids have worn you
out.

WHODUNIT: none of the kids that live in your house.

WHOOPS: an exclamation that translates roughly into "get a
sponge."
=====================================================================

Two Polacks are drving along in their truck when the y see a pig by the side
of the road. Well, this is pretty unusual, so they stop for a look.
  They're sitting there when a highway patrolman rolls up in his car.
the patrolman thinks this is odd, so stops. He looks at the two poles and
says "Does this pig belong to you two?"
  "No officer, we were just driving along and saw the pig here. We stopped and
were trying to figure out what to do with it."
  The officer looks at them for a moment and then says " Well, since ya'll have
a truck there, why don't you put the pig in the truck and take it to the Dallas
Zoo?'
  Well, the polacks figure that's a pretty good idea, and start to load the pig
up. The officer drives off, figuring things are well in hand.
  A few days later, the officer is out patrolling and he sees a truck going the
opposite direction with the two poles in the front, with the pig between them
with a baseball cap on its head. The officer wheels the car around and
pulls the truck over. He goes to the cab and the polack rolls down the window.
  "Boys," he says" I thought I told you two to take that pig to the zoo."
"Well, officer, we did take him to the zoo. As a matter of fact, he liked it
so much, we figured we'd take him to the Rangers game today!"

OBJ: A Polish airplane was landing at an airport.  The pilots had never
been here before.  The captain said to the copilot "That runway looks very
short... I'm going to have to go in at a steeper angle."  A few minutes later,
the copilot observes that the runway was even shorter than they thought, and
advises an even steeper descent.  When they finally land, the copilot turns
to the captain and says "that was incredible.  I've never seen a runway so
short."  The captain replies, "Yes, but look how *wide* it is!!"

Q: How do you have sex with a fat woman? (oops, I mean gravitationally challenged)
A: You slap her on the thigh and ride the first wave in.

Q: How do you have sex with a fat woman?
A: Roll her in flour, and look for the damp spot!

============================================================================
		SEX.EROTIC.FORMULAS
		===================



		     SpermSpill
		     ___	___		     ___
1) Penis(hangtime) = \      1/2 | Penis Length(erect)  |
		     /	   n	| -------------------- | + Volume(ballsac)
		     ---   	| Duration(spermshoot) |
		     n = 1	---		     ---



							1/tightness(vagina)
			__						 __
2) Pain(penetration) =  | Cock(length, diameter) + Cunt(length, diameter) |
			| ----------------------------------------------- |
			| % lubrication * Speed(pumping)/Grip		  |
			--						 --




3) GStringEffectiveness(male) =   sac
				 /  __				  __
				(   | Time(viewing)		   |
			   	 )  | ---------------------------- |  +
				/   | Distance(boner sticking out) |
			      	  1 --				  --


			 /						  \
	   lim          ( Volume(ballsac) * (length(boner) - length(limp)) )
	   Volume -> oo  \						  /











				  --					 --
				  | ButtShakeFactor + BendingFactor 	  |
4) GStringEffectiveness(female) = | ------------------------------------- |
				  | d/dx (length(legs)) + TanningConstant |
				  --					 --

		    / Area(buttshowing)     # of men present 	     \
		*  (  -----------------  +  ------------------------  )
		    \ GStringLength	    Distance(butt from eyes) /





					    1/2	     __			    __
5) SacSqueeze = ((Area(ballsac) * Area(hand))   + d  | Penis Length(flaccid) |
				 		  -- | --------------------- |
				 		  dx | Penis Length(erect)   |
 						     --			    --



		    --		   --
6) lim		    |       x	    |
   x -> SacSqueeze  | ------------- |
	   	    | Pain(ballsac) |
		    --		   --





						  __	       *		       --
7) VibratorEffectiveness = length(fake cock)	  | # batteries + Power requirement     |
			   -----------------   *  | ----------------------------------- |
			   depth(insertion)	  | VibratorSpeed * velocity(insertion) |
						  -- 				       --


    	  3			   4
* Use 1x10  if AC is needed or 1x10  if diesel power is needed





				    __					   __
				    | BeansConsumed + Cellulose(buttcheeks) |
8) FartIntensity = Diameter(anus) * | ------------------------------------- |
				    | Length(ass crack)/Ripples(analstar)   |
				    --					   --



			       /   +oo			  \
   			      /   /			   \
9) LickTime = Area(tongue) * (   (   % pubic hair(male)	    ) + Cunt(depth)
			      \   )  --------------------  /    ------------
			       \ / 1 % pubic hair(female) /	Penis Length




				  __				      __
10) HardonRate = lim		  | Time(SacSqueeze) * Time(stroking)  |     d
		 x -> SemenSpill  |		       --------------- |  +  --  MasturbationTime
				  |		       Penis(LickTime) |     dx
				  --				      --



			 	 __							   __
				 | 		       / bust size			    |
11) NippleHeight = lim           | Volume(uniboob)    (					    |
		   x -> bra cup  | ---------------  *  )   nipplelicks + Amount(nipplehair) |
				 | radius(nipple)     /    -------------------------------- |
				 |			1  d/dx  PussyStimulationFactor     |
				 --							   --










		        / 			  Experience(female) \
12) OrgasmIntensity =  (  Diameter(PenisBase)  +  ------------------  )  *
			\			  Experience(male)   /


	      /	 lim		   CockCurvature  \		       __			       __
	     /   x -> Cunt(depth)  -------------   \		       | InsertionDepth(finger in anus) |
	    (				x	    )  *  Rate(humping)| ------------------------------ |
	     \   -------------------------------   /		       | # ribs on condom		|
	      \  # SexToys * VibratorSpeed	  /		       --			       --



				   __					  __
				   | Time(nipple rub) * Time(pussy stroke) |
13) CreamFlowRate = Area(breast) * | ------------------------------------- |
 				   | d   / Penis Length(flaccid) \	   |
				   | -- (  ---------------------  )	   |
				   | dx  \ Penis Length(erect)   /	   |
 				   --	 				  --

	  Time(humping)			       *
       +  --------------  *  Place(load dropped)
	  # Penis Tweeks


* load dropped values
=====================
in pussy:	1	in mouth:	8
on pussy:	2	on face:	100
on stomach:	3	on self:       -100
in ass:	       -5	on furniture:	0
on ass:		1

Note:
=====
The previous formula is given for one breast and one
nipple only. To obtain the true value of CreamFlowRate,
multiply the value calculated for one breast and one
nipple by:
 1/2
2
The load dropped values remain the same.

-=====================================================================

A Frenchman, an Englishman, a Texan, and a Mexican are flying in a plane.
The pilot explains to her passengers that the plane is too heavy and in
order to avoid an ugly crash, some weight needs to be removed from the
plane.	After removing all the unnecessary items (baggage,etc.), the pilot
reports that the plane is still too heavy and yet more weight needs to be
removed.  She then asks if any of the passengers would be brave enough to
give up their own lives to save the others.  The Frenchman stands, raises
his glass,says "Viva la France!" and jumps out of the plane.  This not being
enough, the Englishman stands up, raises his glass, says"Long live the
Queen!" and jumps out of the plane.  Still this is not enough weight
removed so the Texan stands up, raises his glass, says "Remember the Alamo?"
and throws the Mexican out of the plane.

In the early days of baseball, there was a famous pitcher named Mel,
Mel Faimy, who played for the Milwaukee Brewers.  He was the best
pitcher in the league and led his team to the world series with a .01
ERA, 4 no hitters and 2 perfect games.  Well as expected the Brewers
went to the World Series.  They were playing against the Brooklyn
Dodgers.
  The first game Mel pitched a no hitter and the Brewers won 2-0.  The
second game the Dodgers pulled out a squeaker, winning in the bottom
of the 9th on a solo home run.  Again in the 3rd game the Dodgers won.
Mel pitched the 4th game so of course the Brewers won.  They won the
next game, the Dodgers won the 6th.
  So the Series was all tied up at three games apiece.  The ace pitcher
for the Dodgers was pitching against Mel.  It was tight game, the
Brewers were leading by one point.  Mel was so confident of himself
he started to celebrate early.  During the 7th inning stretch he
popped open a beer and started drinking.  Between the next innings he
had a few more beers.  As you might have guessed this had a negative
impact on his pitching.
  The next batter dribbled a single down the third base line.  Mel
walked the next batter and the next.  With bases loaded, (Mel was
too), Mel proceeded to walk in a run!  The coach came out and talked
to Mel asking if he was alright.  Some how Mel convinced the coach he
was fine.  The next batter came up to bat.  Mel took a deep breath
and fired his patented fast ball.  The batter swung and popped a
ball foul.  The next pitch was a ball.  Mel wound up and threw a big
arching curve, just barely missing the plate.  With the count 2-1,
Mel stepped off the mound for a brief rest.  He was alittle blurry
eyed by now and needed to catch his breath.  He walked back to the
rubber and got ready to throw the next pitch.  A scorching slider
just missed low.  With the score tied, bases loaded, and the count
3-1, every one in the stands held their collective breath for the
next pitch.  Mel came in with his never fail change up.  The batter
swung on the pitch, but he was way out in front of it.  The count was
full, the bases loaded, bottom of the 9th, and the score tied.  The
scene was set for the making or breaking of heros.  Our hero, Mel was
getting ready to throw the final pitch when all of a sudden the beers
he drank finally hit him.  The last pitch was his fast ball.  It left
his hand speeding toward the batter.  Then about 10 feet in front of
the plate it took a nose dive and bounced in the dirt.  Mel had
walked in the winning run!
  After much jubilation on the Dodgers part, the team finally left the
field.  As they pasted the Brewers bench on of the players turned and
pointed to his team mate and said, "Hey what's with all the beer cans
in the Brewers dug-out?"
  "That my friend, is the beer that made Mel Faimy walk us!"

The devil calls up St.Peter and says, "Let's have a baseball game - my people
against your people."
  St. Peter thinks this over, checks his populace, and says, "Sure, but you're
gonna lose - I've got all the hall of famers up here."
  "Maybe so", replies the devil, "but I've got all the umpires!"

  A hunter goes into the woods to hunt a bear.  He carries his trusty
22-gauge rifle with him.  After a while, he spots a very large bear,
takes aim, and fires.  When the smoke clears, the bear is gone.  A
moment later the bear taps the hunter on the shoulder and says,
	"No one shoots at me and gets away with it.  You have
	two choices:  I can rip your throat out and eat you,
	or you can drop your trousers, bend over, and I'll
	[ insert appropriate colloquial for sodomy here ]."
  The hunter decides that anything is better than death, so he drops his
trousers and bends over, and the bear does what he said he would do.
After the bear has left, the hunter pulls up his trousers again and
staggers back into town.  He's pretty mad.
  He buys a much larger gun and returns to the forest.  He sees the same
bear, aims, and fires.  When the smoke clears, the bear is gone.  A
moment later the bear taps the hunter on the shoulder and says,
	"You know what to do."
  Afterwards, the hunter pulls up his trousers, crawls back into town,
and buys a bazooka.  Now he's really mad.  He returns to the forest,
sees the bear, aims, and fires.  The force of the bazooka blast knocks
him flat on his back.  When the smoke clears, the bear is standing over
him and says,
	"You're not doing this for the hunting, are you?"

Q: What's pink, 18 inches long, and makes a grown woman scream?
A: Crib death.

Q: How can you tell when a feminist has an orgasm?
A: Who cares?

Q: Have you heard about Evel Kenevel's newest and most dangerous stunt?
A: Riding across Ethiopia with a chicken strapped to his motorcycle.

Q: Did you hear about Miss Biafra's measurements?
A: 20-22-20

Q: Did you hear about the new Soviet BBQ joint where you don't have to pay?
A: It's called Char-No-Bill

Q: How does a WASP propose marriage?
A: "How would you like to be buried with my people?"

Q: What does an Irish-Catholic wife say during sex?
A: "Honey, I think you should paint the ceiling beige."

Q: What's the difference between an Italian Grandmother and an elephant?
A: Fifty pounds and a black dress.

Q: What do you get when you cross a Puerto Rican and a Mormon?
A: Someone with a thirty-day supply of stolen food in their basement.

Q: What do you get when you cross a white woman with a black man?
A: An abortion.

Q: What do you call a Vietnamese family with one dog?
A: Poor.

Q: What do you call a Vietnamese family with two dogs?
A: Ranchers.

Q  What is the difference between a blonde and the Grand Old Duke of York ?
A  The Grand Old Duke of York only 'had' 10000 men !

One of the nice things about working with Apple equipment is their delightful
sense of humor. A while ago, some of the delightful error messages from the
MPW C compiler went out on the net. They also have a series of developers' CDs
with software and interesting junk on them with great names like, "Lord of the
Files," "The Code Warrior," "Desperately Seeking Seven," "Gorilla's in the
Disk," "Bill and Ted's Excellent CD," and so on. I have meant for some time to
type in the personal ads that adorn "Desperately Seeking Seven," which are
amusing. Yesterday, while rummaging through some test code, I found a
delightful disclaimer. -- jdcc
    This software has not been painstakingly tested by Apple's ruthlessly
    efficient quality engineers (although it was co-written by one of them.)
    Neither Apple Computer, Incorporated, nor the authors of this software
    make any legally binding claim that this software will do anything in
    particular besides use up valuable space on a CD or hard disk. In the
    event that your use of or inability to use this software results in a
    visitation from MacsBug, damage to other software or hardware, the
    explosion of your Macintosh in a shower of sparks (as seen on Star Trek)
    or indeed the end of Western Civilzation As We Know It, your attempts to
    attach blame onto Apple Computer, Incorporated or the authors of this
    software will be expensive and unsuccessful. Have a nice day.

God and the Devil are having a discussion.
God: To many spirits are sneaking into heaven from hell. I want you to stop it.
Devil: What are you going to do if I don't.
God: I'll sue you.
Devil: Yeah Right, Like you have any lawyers in heaven.

Subject: A Fundamental Offering
    A cool new product was announced today. It is Digital's Data
    Suppository. It is by far the very best tool we have for anal-
    ysis. It relieves painful data by letting you apply the cor-
    rect tools to the job. You can scope out any problem and wipe out those
    annoying delays we all encounter in trying to get the straight poop on
    our businesses. You can make intelligent decisions on partners and
    vendors who are friends and those who are enemas. You no longer have to
    be the butt of business jokes.
          It is important to decide to commit to this new strategy. In some
    environments such a decision takes substantial intestinal fortitude. So
    we recommend that a prospect take the time to read the technical
    information and digest it. But don't just sit on it.
          If you have any questions, call 1-800-773-7724 (1-800-PREPARH). And
    remember, we are the leaders in this technology. We will no longer
    accept being number 2.

A man was hitchhiking across the country just prior to a
presidential election and had hit upon a technique for getting
free drinks in bars by guessing which candidate was less popular
and then loudly badmouthing them.  He went into a bar in Colorado
and yelled, "Carter is a horse's ass!"  To his surprise, he was
promptly thrown outside into the dirt.  He picked himself up and
went into another bar, shouting, "Reagan is a horse's ass!"  Seconds
later, he was eating dust again.
      Seeing a cowboy nearby, he called out, "Hey, fella!  If this ain't
Carter country and it ain't Reagan country, whose country is it?"
      The cowboy replied, "Son, this is *horse* country!"

WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A PIZZA AND A JEW?
PIZZA'S DON'T SCREAM WHEN YOU PUT THEM IN AN OVEN.

    There was once a man named Ray
    who made a cunt out of clay.
    he Fucked it quick till it turned to brick
   and pulled all his forskin away...

** every one is entitled to an opinion ....  even though it is wrong...**

Q: Is Magic Johnson sure that he won't play for the Lakers anymore?
A: Yes, he's positive.

Yesterday upon the stair,
I saw a little man who wasn't there.
He wasn't there again today.
How I wish he'd go away.

Nice
Air
Show
Assholes

I remember when we used to laugh at grampa
when he would go out fishing every morning.
Of couse we didn't laugh when he brought
a whore back from town.
-Deep Thought SNL


PRANKSTERS TAKE LAWN ORNAMENT ON VACATION
PATTERSON (AP) - Florence and Pat McMorrow didn't get to travel throughout
America this summer but their elf, Rufus, did.
  Rufus is a 3-foot-high lawn ornament owned by the McMorrows, of Patterson, a
community north of New York City.
  Someone swiped Rufus July 9 from his usual perch on a tree stump in the
couple's front lawn.  He reappeared last week with an envelope tucked under his
arm.  "I'm home.  Vacation pictures", a note on the envelope read.
  There was Rufus on the beach in California, wearing shades.  There he was in
Wyoming, wearing an Indian headdress.  There he was at Wrigley Field in
Chicago, watching the Chicago Cubs.  In all, there were photos of Rufus in 17
states.
  Police and the McMorrow family still don't know who took the statute [sic].
"It was definitely young people," Mrs. McMorrow said.  "They have some sense of
humor."

Christan Mcculuf:  Ahistory teacher whos now history!

What Brand of Shampoo did Christina Use?
Head and Shoulders: Found em on the beach.

Where did the AStornauts take there vaction?
All over florida!

What was the last thing heard on the Black Box?
1.  No not that button
2.  I said a BUD Light!

How come NASA's official drink is now COKE?
'cause they couldn't get 7-up!

What was the last thing Christa said to her husband?
-You feed the dog and I'll feed the fish.

What's the official song of the Challenger?
-"I said a Boom-chica-Boom"

How do we know that the Shuttle program director is impotent?
-He couldn't get it up.

National
Astronaut
Scattering
Administration

Why was there only one black on the challenger?
They didn't know it was going to explode!

Did you hear about the Texan who was so big that when he died they couldn't
find a casket big enough to bury him in?
They gave him an enema and buried him in a shoebox.

   Apple: Rotten to the core.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
            BEASTALITY'S  BEST  BOYS
            ========================

Chours   Oh, Beastality's best boys,
             Beastality's best, SHAG A WALLABIE,
             Beastality's best boys,
             Beastaliyy's best.

        Up the hole of a mole boys,
        Up the hole of a mole, SHAG A WALLABIE,
        Up the hole of a mole boys,
        Up the hole of a mole.

All because .....(Chours)

        Sixtynine with a porkupine,
        Sixtynine with a pork, SHAG A WALLABIE.
        Sixtynine with a porkupine,
        Sixtynine with a pork.

All because ......


        Up the rear of a deer boys,
        ......

All because ........

Verses contiues ..

       Slam your rod up a cod.

       Shoot your load up a toad.

       Drink the sperm of a werm(worm).

       Deep throat with a goat.

       In the mouth of a trout.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------


